Table of Contents
  Cover
  Title Page
  Copyright
  List of Contributors
  Preface
  Chapter 1: Overview
      1.1 Introduction
      1.2 A Bird's-Eye View of Finance
      1.3 Overview of the Chapters
      1.4 Other Topics in Financial Signal Processing and Machine Learning
      References
  Chapter 2: Sparse Markowitz Portfolios
      2.1 Markowitz Portfolios
      2.2 Portfolio Optimization as an Inverse Problem: The Need for
      Regularization
      2.3 Sparse Portfolios
      2.4 Empirical Validation
      2.5 Variations on the Theme
      2.6 Optimal Forecast Combination
      Acknowlegments
      References
  Chapter 3: Mean-Reverting Portfolios
      3.1 Introduction
      3.2 Proxies for Mean Reversion
      3.3 Optimal Baskets
      3.4 Semidefinite Relaxations and Sparse Components
      3.5 Numerical Experiments
      3.6 Conclusion
   References
Chapter 4: Temporal Causal Modeling
   4.1 Introduction
   4.2 TCM
   4.3 Causal Strength Modeling
   4.4 Quantile TCM (Q-TCM)
   4.5 TCM with Regime Change Identification
   4.6 Conclusions
   References
Chapter 5: Explicit Kernel and Sparsity of Eigen Subspace for the AR(1)
Process
   5.1 Introduction
   5.2 Mathematical Definitions
   5.3 Derivation of Explicit KLT Kernel for a Discrete AR(1) Process
   5.4 Sparsity of Eigen Subspace
   5.5 Conclusions
   References
Chapter 6: Approaches to High-Dimensional Covariance and Precision
Matrix Estimations
   6.1 Introduction
   6.2 Covariance Estimation via Factor Analysis
   6.3 Precision Matrix Estimation and Graphical Models
   6.4 Financial Applications
   6.5 Statistical Inference in Panel Data Models
   6.6 Conclusions
   References
Chapter 7: Stochastic Volatility
   7.1 Introduction
   7.2 Asymptotic Regimes and Approximations
   7.3 Merton Problem with Stochastic Volatility: Model Coefficient
   Polynomial Expansions
   7.4 Conclusions
   Acknowledgements
   References
Chapter 8: Statistical Measures of Dependence for Financial Data
   8.1 Introduction
   8.2 Robust Measures of Correlation and Autocorrelation
   8.3 Multivariate Extensions
   8.4 Copulas
   8.5 Types of Dependence
   References
Chapter 9: Correlated Poisson Processes and Their Applications in Financial
Modeling
   9.1 Introduction
   9.2 Poisson Processes and Financial Scenarios
   9.3 Common Shock Model and Randomization of Intensities
   9.4 Simulation of Poisson Processes
   9.5 Extreme Joint Distribution
   9.6 Numerical Results
   9.7 Backward Simulation of the Poisson–Wiener Process
   9.8 Concluding Remarks
   Acknowledgments
   Appendix A
   References
Chapter 10: CVaR Minimizations in Support Vector Machines
   10.1 What Is CVaR?
   10.2 Support Vector Machines
   10.3 -SVMs as CVaR Minimizations
   10.4 Duality
   10.5 Extensions to Robust Optimization Modelings
   10.6 Literature Review
   References
  Chapter 11: Regression Models in Risk Management
     11.1 Introduction
     11.2 Error and Deviation Measures
     11.3 Risk Envelopes and Risk Identifiers
     11.4 Error Decomposition in Regression
     11.5 Least-Squares Linear Regression
     11.6 Median Regression
     11.7 Quantile Regression and Mixed Quantile Regression
     11.8 Special Types of Linear Regression
     11.9 Robust Regression
     References, Further Reading, and Bibliography
  Index
  End User License Agreement

List of Illustrations
  Chapter 3: Mean-Reverting Portfolios: Tradeoffs between Sparsity and
  Volatility
     Figure 3.1 Option implied volatility for Apple between January 4, 2004,
     and December 30, 2010.
     Figure 3.2 Three sample trading experiments, using the PCA, sparse
     PCA, and crossing statistics estimators. (a) Pool of 9 volatility time series
     selected using our fast PCA selection procedure. (b) Basket weights
     estimated with in-sample data using the eigenvector of the covariance
     matrix with the smallest eigenvalue, the smallest eigenvector with a
     sparsity constraint of                 , and the crossing statistics estimator
     with a volatility threshold of       , (i.e., a constraint on the basket's
     variance to be larger than      the median variance of all 8 assets). (c)
     Using these 3 procedures, the time series of the resulting basket price in
     the in-sample part (c) and out-of-sample parts (d) are displayed. (e)
     Using the Jurek and Yang (2007) trading strategy results in varying
     positions (expressed as units of baskets) during the outsample testing
     phase. (f) Transaction costs that result from trading the assets to achieve
     such positions accumulate over time. (g) Taking both trading gains and
transaction costs into account, the net wealth of the investor for each
strategy can be computed (the Sharpe ratio over the test period is
displayed in the legend). Note how both sparsity and volatility
constraints translate into portfolios composed of fewer assets, but with a
higher variance.
Figure 3.3 Average Sharpe ratio for the Jurek and Yang (2007) trading
strategy captured over about 922 trading episodes, using different basket
estimation approaches. These 922 trading episodes were obtained by
considering 7 disjoint time-windows in our market sample, each of a
length of about one year. Each time-window was divided into 85% in-
sample data to estimate baskets, and 15% outsample to test strategies. On
each time-window, the set of 210 tradable assets during that period was
clustered using sectorial information, and each cluster screened (in the
in-sample part of the time-window) to look for the most promising
baskets of size between 8 and 12 in terms of mean reversion, by choosing
greedily subsets of stocks that exhibited the smallest minimal
eigenvalues in their covariance matrices. For each trading episode, the
same universe of stocks was fed to different mean-reversion algorithms.
Because volatility time-series are bounded and quite stationary, we
consider the PCA approach, which uses the eigenvector with the smallest
eigenvalue of the covariance matrix of the time-series to define a
cointegrated relationship. Besides standard PCA, we have also consider
sparse PCA eigenvectors with minimal eigenvalue, with the size of the
support of the eigenvector (the size of the resulting basket) constrained to
be 30%, 50% or 70% of the total number of considered assets. We
consider also the portmanteau, predictability and crossing stats
estimation techniques with variance thresholds of            and a support
whose size (the number of assets effectively traded) is targeted to be
about       of the size of the considered universe (itself between 8 and
12). As can be seen in the figure, the sharpe ratios of all trading
approaches decrease with an increase in transaction costs. One expects
sparse baskets to perform better under the assumption that costs are high,
and this is indeed observed here. Because the relationship between
sharpe ratios and transaction costs can be efficiently summarized as
being a linear one, we propose in the plots displayed in Figure 3.4 a way
to summarize the lines above with two numbers each: their intercept
(Sharpe level in the quasi-absence of costs) and slope (degradation of
Sharpe as costs increase). This visualization is useful to observe how
   sparsity (basket size) and volatility thresholds influence the robustness to
   costs of the strategies we propose. This visualization allows us to observe
   how performance is influenced by these parameter settings.
   Figure 3.4 Relationships between Sharpe in a low cost setting (intercept)
   in the -axis and robustness of Sharpe to costs (slope of Sharpe/costs
   curve) of a different estimators implemented with varying volatility
   levels and sparsity levels parameterized as a multiple of the universe
   size. Each colored square in the Figure above corresponds to the
   performance of a given estimator (Portmanteau in subFigure ,
   Predictability in subFigure     and Crossing Statistics in subFigure )
   using different parameters for                            and
                    . The parameters used for each experiment are displayed
   using an arrow whose vertical length is proportional to and horizontal
   length is proportional to .
Chapter 4: Temporal Causal Modeling
   Figure 4.1 Causal CSM graphs of ETFs from iShares formed during four
   different 750-day periods in 2007–2008. Each graph moves the window
   of data over 50 business days in order to discover the effect of time on
   the causal networks. The lag used for VAR spans the 5 days (i.e., uses
   five features) preceding the target day. Each feature is a monthly return
   computed over the previous 22 business days.
   Figure 4.2 Generic TCM algorithm.
   Figure 4.3 Method group OMP.
   Figure 4.4 Output causal structures on one synthetic dataset by the
   various methods. In this example, the group-based method exactly
   reconstructs the correct graph, while the nongroup ones fail badly.
   Figure 4.5 Method Quantile group OMP.
   Figure 4.6 Log-returns for ticker IVV (which tracks S&P 500) from April
   18, 2005, through April 10, 2008. Outliers introduced on 10/26/2005,
   12/14/2007, and 01/16/2008 are represented by red circles.
   Figure 4.7 (Left) Output switching path on one synthetic dataset with two
   Markov states. Transition jumps missing in the estimated Markov path
   are highlighted in red. (Right) The corresponding output networks: (a)
   true network at state 1; (b) estimated network at state 1; (c) true network
   at state 2; and (d) estimated network at state 2. Edges coded in red are the
   false positives, and those in green are the false negatives.
   Figure 4.8 Results of modeling monthly stock observations using MS-
   TCM. MS-TCM uncovered a regime change after the 19th time step;
   columns Model 1 and Model 2 contain the coefficients of the
   corresponding two TCM models. The column Model all gives the
   coefficients when plain TCM without regime identification is used. The
   symbols C, KEY, WFC, and JPM are money center banks; SO, DUK, D,
   HE, and EIX are electrical utilities companies; LUX, CAL, and AMR are
   major airlines; AMGN, GILD, CELG, GENZ, and BIIB are
   biotechnology companies; CAT, DE, and HIT are machinery
   manufacturers; IMO, HES, and YPF are fuel refineries; and X.GPSC is
   an index.
Chapter 5: Explicit Kernel and Sparsity of Eigen Subspace for the AR(1)
Process
   Figure 5.1 (a)      Performance of KLT and DCT for an AR(1) process
   with various values of and         ; (b)   performance of KLT and
   DCT as a function of for         .
   Figure 5.2 Functions        and       for various values of    where
   ,      , and      .
   Figure 5.3 Functions           and               for the AR(1) process
   with       and various values of , where             ,       ,        , and
                     ,        .
   Figure 5.4 The roots of the transcendental tangent equation 5.29,      , as
   a function of for         .
   Figure 5.5 Computation time, in seconds, to calculate        and
   for an AR(1) process with         , and different values of (
                ) and                  (Torun and Akansu, 2013).
   Figure 5.6 Probability density function of arcsine distribution for
               and          . Loadings of a second PC for an AR(1) signal
   source with         and          are fitted to arcsine distribution by
   finding minimum and maximum values in the PC.
   Figure 5.7 Normalized histograms of (a) PC1 and (b) PC2 loadings for an
   AR(1) signal source with           and         . The dashed lines in each
   histogram show the probability that is calculated by integrating an
   arcsine pdf for each bin interval.
   Figure 5.8 Rate (bits)-distortion (SQNR) performance of zero mean and
   unit variance arcsine pdf-optimized quantizer for        bins. The
   distortion level is increased by combining multiple bins around zero in a
   larger zero-zone.
   Figure 5.9 Orthogonality imperfectness-rate (sparsity) trade-off for
   sparse eigen subspaces of three AR(1) sources with          .
   Figure 5.10 (a) Variance loss (VL) measurements of sparsed first PCs
   generated by SKLT, SPCA, SPC, ST, and DSPCA methods with respect
   to nonsparsity (NS) for an AR(1) source with       and          ; (b) NS
   and VL measurements of sparsed eigenvectors for an AR(1) source with
          and          generated by the SKLT method and SPCA algorithm.
   Figure 5.11 Normalized histogram of eigenmatrix elements for an
   empirical correlation matrix of end-of-day (EOD) returns for 100 stocks
   in the NASDAQ-100 index.            -day measurement window ending on
   April 9, 2014.
   Figure 5.12 VL measurements of sparsed first PCs generated by SKLT,
   SPCA, SPC, ST, and DSPCA methods with respect to NS for an
   empirical correlation matrix of EOD returns for 100 stocks in the
   NASDAQ-100 index with            -day measurement window ending on
   April 9, 2014.
   Figure 5.13 Cumulative explained variance loss with             generated
   daily from an empirical correlation matrix of EOD returns between April
   9, 2014, and May 22, 2014, for 100 stocks in the NASDAQ-100 index by
   using KLT, SKLT, SPCA, and ST methods. NS levels of 85%, 80%, and
   75% for all PCs are forced in (a), (b), and (c), respectively, using
   days.
   Figure 5.14 (a)    and (b) of sparse eigen subspaces generated daily
   from an empirical correlation matrix of EOD returns between April 9,
   2014, and May 22, 2014, for 100 stocks in the NASDAQ-100 index by
   using SKLT, SPCA, and ST methods, respectively. NS level of 85% for
   all PCs is forced with        days.
Chapter 6: Approaches to High-Dimensional Covariance and Precision
Matrix Estimations
   Figure 6.1 Minimum eigenvalue of          as a function of for three
   choices of thresholding rules. Adapted from Fan et al. (2013).
   Figure 6.2 Averages of                         (left panel) and
                 (right panel) with known factors (solid red curve), unknown
   factors (solid blue curve), and sample covariance (dashed curve) over
   200 simulations, as a function of the dimensionality . Taken from Fan
   et al. (2013).
   Figure 6.3 Boxplots of                    for 10 stocks. As can be seen,
   the original data has many outliers, which is addressed by the normal-
   score transformation on the rescaled data (right).
   Figure 6.4 The estimated TIGER graph using the S&P 500 stock data
   from January 1, 2003, to January 1, 2008.
   Figure 6.5 The histogram and normal QQ plots of the marginal
   expression levels of the gene MECPS. We see the data are not exactly
   Gaussian distributed. Adapted from Liu and Wang (2012).
   Figure 6.6 The estimated gene networks of the Arabadopsis dataset. The
   within-pathway edges are denoted by solid lines, and between-pathway
   edges are denoted by dashed lines. From Liu and Wang (2012).
   Figure 6.7 Dynamics of p-values and selected stocks ( , from Fan et al.,
   2014b).
   Figure 6.8 Histograms of -values for         ,    , and PEM (from Fan et
   al., 2014b).
Chapter 7: Stochastic Volatility
   Figure 7.1 Implied volatility from S&P 500 index options on May 25,
   2010, plotted as a function of log-moneyness to maturity ratio:
                . DTM, days to maturity.
   Figure 7.2 Exact (solid) and approximate (dashed) implied volatilities in
   the Heston model. The horizontal axis is   -moneyness        .
   Parameters:         ,         ,      ,               ,           .
Chapter 8: Statistical Measures of Dependence for Financial Data
   Figure 8.1 Top left: Strong and persistent positive autocorrelation, that is,
   persistence in local level; top right: moderate volatility clustering, that is,
   i.e., persistence in local variation. Middle left: Right tail density
   estimates of Gaussian versus heavy-or thick-tailed data; middle right:
   sample quantiles of heavy-tailed data versus the corresponding quantiles
   of the Gaussian distribution. Bottom left: Linear regression line fit to
   non-Gaussian data; right: corresponding estimated density contours of
   the normalized sample ranks, which show a positive association that is
   stronger in the lower left quadrant compared to the upper right.
   Figure 8.2 Bank of America (BOA) daily closing stock price. Bottom:
   Standardized (Fisher's transformation) ACF based on Kendall's tau and
   Pearson's correlation coefficient for the squared daily stock returns.
   Figure 8.3 Realized time-series simulated from each of the three process
   models discussed in Example 8.1.
   Figure 8.4 Tree representation of the fully nested (left) and partially
   nested (right) Archimedean copula construction. Leaf nodes represent
   uniform random variables, while the internal and root nodes represent
   copulas. Edges indicate which variables or copulas are used in the
   creation of a new copula.
   Figure 8.5 Graphical representation of the C-vine (left) and D-vine
   (right) Archimedean copula construction. Leaf nodes labeled represent
   uniform random variables, whereas nodes labeled       represent the th
   copula at the th level. Edges indicate which variables or copulas are
   used in the creation of a new copula.
Chapter 9: Correlated Poisson Processes and Their Applications in Financial
Modeling
   Figure 9.1 Typical monotone paths.
   Figure 9.2 Partitions of the unit interval:                   .
   Figure 9.3 Partitions of the unit interval: .
   Figure 9.4 Support of the distribution            :               .
   Figure 9.5 Support of the distribution            :                       .
   Figure 9.6 Support of the distribution                :   .
   Figure 9.7 Correlation boundaries:            .
   Figure 9.8 Comparison of correlation boundaries:                      .
   Figure 9.9 Correlation bounds.
Chapter 10: CVaR Minimizations in Support Vector Machines
   Figure 10.1 CVaR, VaR, mean, and maximum of distribution. (a, c) The
   cumulative distribution function (cdf) and the density of a continuous
loss distribution; (b, d) the cdf and histogram of a discrete loss
distribution. In all four figures, the location of VaR with         is
indicated by a vertical dashed line. In (c) and (d), the locations of CVaR
and the mean of the distributions are indicated with vertical solid and
dashed-dotted lines. In (b) and (d), the location of the maximum loss is
shown for the discrete case.
Figure 10.2 Convex functions dominating           .
Figure 10.3 Illustration of         in a discrete distribution on    with
                           . This Figure shows how              varies
depending on (                     ). As approaches 1,
approaches the unit simplex . The risk envelope shrinks to the point
                            as decreases to 0.
Figure 10.4 Two separating hyperplanes and their geometric margins.
The dataset is said to be linearly separable if there exist          and
such that                  for all           . If the dataset is linearly
separable, there are infinitely many hyperplanes separating the dataset.
According to generalization theory (Vapnik, 1995), the hyperplane
         is preferable to          . The optimization problem (10.12) (or,
equivalently, (10.13)) finds a hyperplane that separates the datasets with
the largest margin.
Figure 10.5 -SVC as a CVaR minimization. The Figure on the left
shows an optimal separating hyperplane                       given by -
SVC (         ). The one on the right is a histogram of the optimal
distribution of the negative margin,                                  .
The locations of the minimized CVaR (solid line) and the corresponding
VaR (broken line) are indicated in the histogram.
Figure 10.6 Minimized CVaR and corresponding VaR with respect to .
CVaR indicates the optimal value of E -SVC (10.26) for binary
classification.      is the value of at which the optimal value becomes
zero. For          , E -SVC (10.26) reduces to -SVC (10.25). For
        , -SVC (10.25) results in a trivial solution, while E -SVC
(10.26) still attains a nontrivial solution with the positive optimal value.
Figure 10.7 Relations among four classification formulations. The two
formulations on the left are equivalent to the standard -SVC (10.16),
while those on the right are equivalent to E -SVC (10.18). By resolving
the nonconvexity issues that arise from the equality constraint, E -SVC
     provides a classifier that cannot be attained by -SVC.
     Figure 10.8 -SVR as a CVaR minimization. The left Figure shows the
     regression model               given by -SVR (           ). The right one
     shows the histogram of the optimal distribution of the residual
                                . The locations of the minimized CVaR (green
     solid line) and the corresponding VaR (red dashed line) are indicated in
     the histogram.
     Figure 10.9 Two-dimensional examples of reduced convex hulls. Here,
     ‘+’ and ‘ ’ represent the data samples. As increases, the size of each
     reduced convex hull shrinks. The reduced convex hull is a single point
     for       , whereas it is equal to the convex hull for sufficiently close to
     0. For linearly inseparable datasets, the corresponding convex hulls (or
     the reduced convex hulls for a small ) intersect, and the primal
     formulation (10.25)0 results in a trivial solution satisfying         .
     Figure 10.10 Convex hull of the union of risk envelopes (        ).

List of Tables
  Chapter 4: Temporal Causal Modeling
     Table 4.1 Results of TCM modeling on an ETF that tracks the S&P 500
     between 2005 and 2015 that depicts the causal strength values for the
     three strongest relationships are given for each time period
     Table 4.2 The accuracy ( ) and standard error in identifying the correct
     model of the two nongrouped TCM methods, compared to those of the
     grouped TCM methods on synthetic data
     Table 4.3 Time-series selected for IVV, which tracks S&P 500, using Q-
     TCM and TCM on noisy data. The correct features are South Korea,
     Japan, and China, which are discovered by Q-TCM
     Table 4.4 MSE on test period for Q-TCM and TCM models for IVV on
     noisy data
     Table 4.5 Accuracy of comparison methods in identifying the correct
     Bayesian networks measured by the average Rand index and       score on
     synthetic data with a varying number of Markov states (K) and lags (L).
     The numbers in the parentheses are standard errors
Chapter 5: Explicit Kernel and Sparsity of Eigen Subspace for the AR(1)
Process
   Table 5.1 Relevant parameter values of SKLT example for the first 16
   PCs of an AR(1) source with         and       . They explain 68.28%
   of the total variance
Chapter 6: Approaches to High-Dimensional Covariance and Precision
Matrix Estimations
   Table 6.1 Mean and covariance matrix used to generate
   Table 6.2 Parameters of     generating process
   Table 6.3 Variable descriptive statistics for the Fama–French three-factor
   model (Adapted from Fan et al., 2014b)
   Table 6.4 Three interesting choices of the weight matrix
   Table 6.5 Canonical correlations for simulation study (from Bai and
   Liao, 2013)
   Table 6.6 Method comparison for the panel data with interactive effects
   (from Bai and Liao, 2013)
Chapter 8: Statistical Measures of Dependence for Financial Data
   Table 8.1 Percentage of tests failing to reject   of no lag-1 correlation
   Table 8.2 A Table of common Archimedean copulas
Financial Signal Processing and
Machine Learning

Edited by
Ali N. Akansu
New Jersey Institute of Technology, USA

Sanjeev R. Kulkarni
Princeton University, USA

Dmitry Malioutov
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, USA
This edition first published 2016
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd First Edition published in 2016
Registered office
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, United Kingdom
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to apply for
permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com.
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the
UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of
the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not
be available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author(s) have used their best efforts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not
engaged in rendering professional services and neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for
damages arising herefrom. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a
competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data applied for ISBN: 9781118745670
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
List of Contributors
  Ali N. Akansu New Jersey Institute of Technology, USA
  Marco Cuturi Kyoto University, Japan
  Alexandre d'Aspremont CNRS - Ecole Normale supérieure, France
  Christine De Mol Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium
  Jianqing Fan Princeton University, USA
  Jun-ya Gotoh Chuo University, Japan
  Nicholas A. James Cornell University, USA
  Prabhanjan Kambadur Bloomberg L.P., USA
  Alexander Kreinin Risk Analytics, IBM, Canada
  Sanjeev R. Kulkarni Princeton University, USA
  Yuan Liao University of Maryland, USA
  Han Liu Princeton University, USA
  Matthew Lorig University of Washington, USA
  Aurélie C. Lozano IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, USA
  Ronny Luss IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, USA
  Dmitry Malioutov IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, USA
  David S. Matteson Cornell University, USA
  William B. Nicholson Cornell University, USA
  Ronnie Sircar Princeton University, USA
  Akiko Takeda The University of Tokyo, Japan
  Mustafa U. Torun New Jersey Institute of Technology, USA
  Stan Uryasev University of Florida, USA
  Onur Yilmaz New Jersey Institute of Technology, USA
Preface
This edited volume collects and unifies a number of recent advances in the
signal-processing and machine-learning literature with significant applications in
financial risk and portfolio management. The topics in the volume include
characterizing statistical dependence and correlation in high dimensions,
constructing effective and robust risk measures, and using these notions of risk
in portfolio optimization and rebalancing through the lens of convex
optimization. It also presents signal-processing approaches to model return,
momentum, and mean reversion, including both theoretical and implementation
aspects. Modern finance has become global and highly interconnected. Hence,
these topics are of great importance in portfolio management and trading, where
the financial industry is forced to deal with large and diverse portfolios in a
variety of asset classes. The investment universe now includes tens of thousands
of international equities and corporate bonds, and a wide variety of other interest
rate and derivative products-often with limited, sparse, and noisy market data.
Using traditional risk measures and return forecasting (such as historical sample
covariance and sample means in Markowitz theory) in high-dimensional settings
is fraught with peril for portfolio optimization, as widely recognized by
practitioners. Tools from high-dimensional statistics, such as factor models,
eigen-analysis, and various forms of regularization that are widely used in real-
time risk measurement of massive portfolios and for designing a variety of
trading strategies including statistical arbitrage, are highlighted in the book. The
dramatic improvements in computational power and special-purpose hardware
such as field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) and graphics processing units
(GPUs) along with low-latency data communications facilitate the realization of
these sophisticated financial algorithms that not long ago were “hard to
implement.”
The book covers a number of topics that have been popular recently in machine
learning and signal processing to solve problems with large portfolios. In
particular, the connections between the portfolio theory and sparse learning and
compressed sensing, robust optimization, non-Gaussian data-driven risk
measures, graphical models, causal analysis through temporal-causal modeling,
and large-scale copula-based approaches are highlighted in the book.
Although some of these techniques already have been used in finance and
reported in journals and conferences of different disciplines, this book attempts
to give a unified treatment from a common mathematical perspective of high-
dimensional statistics and convex optimization. Traditionally, the academic
quantitative finance community did not have much overlap with the signal and
information-processing communities. However, the fields are seeing more
interaction, and this trend is accelerating due to the paradigm in the financial
sector which has embraced state-of-the-art, high-performance computing and
signal-processing technologies. Thus, engineers play an important role in this
financial ecosystem. The goal of this edited volume is to help to bridge the
divide, and to highlight machine learning and signal processing as disciplines
that may help drive innovations in quantitative finance and electronic trading,
including high-frequency trading.
The reader is assumed to have graduate-level knowledge in linear algebra,
probability, and statistics, and an appreciation for the key concepts in
optimization. Each chapter provides a list of references for readers who would
like to pursue the topic in more depth. The book, complemented with a primer in
financial engineering, may serve as the main textbook for a graduate course in
financial signal processing.
We would like to thank all the authors who contributed to this volume as well as
all of the anonymous reviewers who provided valuable feedback on the chapters
in this book. We also gratefully acknowledge the editors and staff at Wiley for
their efforts in bringing this project to fruition.
Chapter 1
Overview
Financial Signal Processing and Machine
Learning
   Ali N. Akansu1, Sanjeev R. Kulkarni2 and Dmitry Malioutov3
   1New Jersey Institute of Technology, USA
   2Princeton University, USA
   3IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, USA



1.1 Introduction
In the last decade, we have seen dramatic growth in applications for signal-
processing and machine-learning techniques in many enterprise and industrial
settings. Advertising, real estate, healthcare, e-commerce, and many other
industries have been radically transformed by new processes and practices
relying on collecting and analyzing data about operations, customers,
competitors, new opportunities, and other aspects of business. The financial
industry has been one of the early adopters, with a long history of applying
sophisticated methods and models to analyze relevant data and make intelligent
decisions – ranging from the quadratic programming formulation in Markowitz
portfolio selection (Markowitz, 1952), factor analysis for equity modeling (Fama
and French, 1993), stochastic differential equations for option pricing (Black and
Scholes, 1973), stochastic volatility models in risk management (Engle, 1982;
Hull and White, 1987), reinforcement learning for optimal trade execution
(Bertsimas and Lo, 1998), and many other examples. While there is a great deal
of overlap among techniques in machine learning, signal processing and
financial econometrics, historically, there has been rather limited awareness and
slow permeation of new ideas among these areas of research. For example, the
ideas of stochastic volatility and copula modeling, which are quite central in
financial econometrics, are less known in the signal-processing literature, and
the concepts of sparse modeling and optimization that have had a transformative
impact on signal processing and statistics have only started to propagate slowly
into financial applications. The aim of this book is to raise awareness of possible
synergies and interactions among these disciplines, present some recent
developments in signal processing and machine learning with applications in
finance, and also facilitate interested experts in signal processing to learn more
about applications and tools that have been developed and widely used by the
financial community.
We start this chapter with a brief summary of basic concepts in finance and risk
management that appear throughout the rest of the book. We present the
underlying technical themes, including sparse learning, convex optimization, and
non-Gaussian modeling, followed by brief overviews of the chapters in the book.
Finally, we mention a number of highly relevant topics that have not been
included in the volume due to lack of space.

1.2 A Bird's-Eye View of Finance
The financial ecosystem and markets have been transformed with the advent of
new technologies where almost any financial product can be traded in the
globally interconnected cyberspace of financial exchanges by anyone, anywhere,
and anytime. This systemic change has placed real-time data acquisition and
handling, low-latency communications technologies and services, and high-
performance processing and automated decision making at the core of such
complex systems. The industry has already coined the term big data finance, and
it is interesting to see that technology is leading the financial industry as it has
been in other sectors like e-commerce, internet multimedia, and wireless
communications. In contrast, the knowledge base and exposure of the
engineering community to the financial sector and its relevant activity have been
quite limited. Recently, there have been an increasing number of publications by
the engineering community in the finance literature, including A Primer for
Financial Engineering (Akansu and Torun, 2015) and research contributions like
Akansu et al., (2012) and Pollak et al., (2011). This volume facilitates that trend,
and it is composed of chapter contributions on selected topics written by
prominent researchers in quantitative finance and financial engineering.
We start by sketching a very broad-stroke view of the field of finance, its
objectives, and its participants to put the chapters into context for readers with
engineering expertise. Finance broadly deals with all aspects of money
management, including borrowing and lending, transfer of money across
continents, investment and price discovery, and asset and liability management
by governments, corporations, and individuals. We focus specifically on trading
where the main participants may be roughly classified into hedgers, investors,
speculators, and market makers (and other intermediaries). Despite their
different goals, all participants try to balance the two basic objectives in trading:
to maximize future expected rewards (returns) and to minimize the risk of
to maximize future expected rewards (returns) and to minimize the risk of
potential losses.
Naturally, one desires to buy a product cheap and sell it at a higher price in order
to achieve the ultimate goal of profiting from this trading activity. Therefore, the
expected return of an investment over any holding time (horizon) is one of the
two fundamental performance metrics of a trade. The complementary metric is
its variation, often measured as the standard deviation over a time window, and
called investment risk or market risk.1 Return and risk are two typically
conflicting but interwoven measures, and risk-normalized return (Sharpe ratio)
finds its common use in many areas of finance. Portfolio optimization involves
balancing risk and reward to achieve investment objectives by optimally
combining multiple financial instruments into a portfolio. The critical ingredient
in forming portfolios is to characterize the statistical dependence between prices
of various financial instruments in the portfolio. The celebrated Markowitz
portfolio formulation (Markowitz, 1952) was the first principled mathematical
framework to balance risk and reward based on the covariance matrix (also
known as the variance-covariance or VCV matrix in finance) of returns (or log-
returns) of financial instruments as a measure of statistical dependence. Portfolio
management is a rich and active field, and many other formulations have been
proposed, including risk parity portfolios (Roncalli, 2013), Black–Litterman
portfolios (Black and Litterman, 1992), log-optimal portfolios (Cover and
Ordentlich, 1996), and conditional value at risk (cVaR) and coherent risk
measures for portfolios (Rockafellar and Uryasev, 2000) that address various
aspects ranging from the difficulty of estimating the risk and return for large
portfolios to the non-Gaussian nature of financial time series, and to more
complex utility functions of investors.
The recognition of a price inefficiency is one of the crucial pieces of information
to trade that product. If the price is deemed to be low based on some analysis
(e.g. fundamental or statistical), an investor would like to buy it with the
expectation that the price will go up in time. Similarly, one would shortsell it
(borrow the product from a lender with some fee and sell it at the current market
price) when its price is forecast to be higher than what it should be. Then, the
investor would later buy to cover it (buy from the market and return the
borrowed product back to the lender) when the price goes down. This set of
transactions is the building block of any sophisticated financial trading activity.
The main challenge is to identify price inefficiencies, also called alpha of a
product, and swiftly act upon it for the purpose of making a profit from the trade.
The efficient market hypothesis (EMH) stipulates that the market
instantaneously aggregates and reflects all of the relevant information to price
various securities; hence, it is impossible to beat the market. However, violations
of the EMH assumptions abound: unequal availability of information, access to
high-speed infrastructure, and various frictions and regulations in the market
have fostered a vast and thriving trading industry.
Fundamental investors find alpha (i.e., predict the expected return) based on
their knowledge of enterprise strategy, competitive advantage, aptitude of its
leadership, economic and political developments, and future outlook. Traders
often find inefficiencies that arise due to the complexity of market operations.
Inefficiencies come from various sources such as market regulations, complexity
of exchange operations, varying latency, private sources of information, and
complex statistical considerations. An arbitrage is a typically short-lived market
anomaly where the same financial instrument can be bought at one venue
(exchange) for a lower price than it can be simultaneously sold at another venue.
Relative value strategies recognize that similar instruments can exhibit
significant (unjustified) price differences. Statistical trading strategies, including
statistical arbitrage, find patterns and correlations in historical trading data using
machine-learning methods and tools like factor models, and attempt to exploit
them hoping that these relations will persist in the future. Some market
inefficiencies arise due to unequal access to information, or the speed of
dissemination of this information. The various sources of market inefficiencies
give rise to trading strategies at different frequencies, from high-frequency
traders who hold their positions on the order of milliseconds, to midfrequency
trading that ranges from intraday (holding no overnight position) to a span of a
few days, and to long-term trading ranging from a few weeks to years. High-
frequency trading requires state-of-the-art computing, network communications,
and trading infrastructure: a large number of trades are made where each
position is held for a very short time period and typically produces a small return
with very little risk. Longer term strategies are less dependent on latency and
sophisticated technology, but individual positions are typically held for a longer
time horizon and can pose substantial risk.

1.2.1 Trading and Exchanges
There is a vast array of financial instruments ranging from stocks and bonds to a
variety of more sophisticated products like futures, exchange-traded funds
(ETFs), swaps, collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), and exotic options (Hull,
2011). Each product is structured to serve certain needs of the investment
community. Portfolio managers create investment portfolios for their clients
based on the risk appetite and desired return. Since prices, expected returns, and
based on the risk appetite and desired return. Since prices, expected returns, and
even correlations of products in financial markets naturally fluctuate, it is the
portfolio manager's task to measure the performance of a portfolio and maintain
(rebalance) it in order to deliver the expected return.
The market for a security is formed by its buyers (bidding) and sellers (asking)
with defined price and order types that describe the conditions for trades to
happen. Such markets for various financial instruments are created and
maintained by exchanges (e.g., the New York Stock Exchange, NASDAQ,
London Stock Exchange, and Chicago Mercantile Exchange), and they must be
compliant with existing trading rules and regulations. Other venues where
trading occurs include dark pools, and over-the-counter or interbank trading. An
order book is like a look-up table populated by the desired price and quantity
(volume) information of traders willing to trade a financial instrument. It is
created and maintained by an exchange. Certain securities may be
simultaneously traded at multiple exchanges. It is a common practice that an
exchange assigns one or several market makers for each security in order to
maintain the robustness of its market.
The health (or liquidity) of an order book for a particular financial product is
related to the bid–ask spread, which is defined as the difference between the
lowest price of sell orders and the highest price of buy orders. A robust order
book has a low bid–ask spread supported with large quantities at many price
levels on both sides of the book. This implies that there are many buyers and
sellers with high aggregated volumes on both sides of the book for that product.
Buying and selling such an instrument at any time are easy, and it is classified as
a high-liquidity (liquid) product in the market. Trades for a security happen
whenever a buyer–seller match happens and their orders are filled by the
exchange(s). Trades of a product create synchronous price and volume signals
and are viewed as discrete time with irregular sampling intervals due to the
random arrival times of orders at the market. Exchanges charge traders
commissions (a transaction cost) for their matching and fulfillment services.
Market-makers are offered some privileges in exchange for their market-making
responsibilities to always maintain a two-sided order book.
The intricacies of exchange operations, order books, and microscale price
formation is the study of market microstructure (Harris, 2002; O'Hara, 1995).
Even defining the price for a security becomes rather complicated, with irregular
time intervals characterized by the random arrivals of limit and market orders,
multiple definitions of prices (highest bid price, lowest ask price, midmarket
price, quantity-weighted prices, etc.), and the price movements occurring at
discrete price levels (ticks). This kind of fine granularity is required for
designing high-frequency trading strategies. Lower frequency strategies may
view prices as regular discrete-time time series (daily or hourly) with a definition
of price that abstracts away the details of market microstructure and instead
considers some notion of aggregate transaction costs. Portfolio allocation
strategies usually operate at this low-frequency granularity with prices viewed as
real-valued stochastic processes.

1.2.2 Technical Themes in the Book
Although the scope of financial signal processing and machine learning is very
wide, in this book, we have chosen to focus on a well-selected set of topics
revolving around the concepts of high-dimensional covariance estimation,
applications of sparse learning in risk management and statistical arbitrage, and
non-Gaussian and heavy-tailed measures of dependence.2
A unifying challenge for many applications of signal processing and machine
learning is the high-dimensional nature of the data, and the need to exploit the
inherent structure in those data. The field of finance is, of course, no exception;
there, thousands of domestic equities and tens of thousands of international
equities, tens of thousands of bonds, and even more options contracts with
various strikes and expirations provide a very rich source of data. Modeling the
dependence among these instruments is especially challenging, as the number of
pairwise relationships (e.g., correlations) is quadratic in the number of
instruments. Simple traditional tools like the sample covariance estimate are not
applicable in high-dimensional settings where the number of data points is small
or comparable to the dimension of the space (El Karoui, 2013). A variety of
approaches have been devised to tackle this challenge – ranging from simple
dimensionality reduction techniques like principal component analysis and factor
analysis, to Markov random fields (or sparse covariance selection models), and
several others. They rely on exploiting additional structure in the data (sparsity
or low-rank, or Markov structure) in order to reduce the sheer number of
parameters in covariance estimation. Chapter 1.3.5 provides a comprehensive
overview of high-dimensional covariance estimation. Chapter 1.3.4 derives an
explicit eigen-analysis for the covariance matrices of AR processes, and
investigates their sparsity.
The sparse modeling paradigm that has been highly influential in signal
processing is based on the premise that in many settings with a large number of
variables, only a small subset of these variables are active or important. The
dimensionality of the problem can thus be reduced by focusing on these
variables. The challenge is, of course, that the identity of these key variables
may not be known, and the crux of the problem involves identifying this subset.
The discovery of efficient approaches based on convex relaxations and greedy
methods with theoretical guarantees has opened an explosive interest in theory
and applications of these methods in various disciplines spanning from
compressed sensing to computational biology (Chen et al., 1998; Mallat and
Zhang, 1993; Tibshirani, 1996). We explore a few exciting applications of sparse
modeling in finance. Chapter 1.3.1 presents sparse Markowitz portfolios where,
in addition to balancing risk and expected returns, a new objective is imposed
requiring the portfolio to be sparse. The sparse Markowitz framework has a
number of benefits, including better statistical out-of-sample performance, better
control of transaction costs, and allowing portfolio managers and traders to focus
on a small subset of financial instruments. Chapter 1.3.2 introduces a
formulation to find sparse eigenvectors (and generalized eigenvectors) that can
be used to design sparse mean-reverting portfolios, with applications to
statistical arbitrage strategies. In Chapter 1.3.3, another variation of sparsity, the
so-called group sparsity, is used in the context of causal modeling of high-
dimensional time series. In group sparsity, the variables belong to a number of
groups, where only a small number of groups is selected to be active, while the
variables within the groups need not be sparse. In the context of temporal causal
modeling, the lagged variables at different lags are used as a group to discover
influences among the time series.
Another dominating theme in the book is the focus on non-Gaussian, non-
stationary and heavy-tailed distributions, which are critical for realistic modeling
of financial data. The measure of risk based on variance (or standard deviation)
that relies on the covariance matrix among the financial instruments has been
widely used in finance due to its theoretical elegance and computational
tractability. There is a significant interest in developing computational and
modeling approaches for more flexible risk measures. A very potent alternative
is the cVaR, which measures the expected loss below a certain quantile of the
loss distribution (Rockafellar and Uryasev, 2000). It provides a very practical
alternative to the value at risk (VaR) measure, which is simply the quantile of
the loss distribution. VaR has a number of problems such as lack of coherence,
and it is very difficult to optimize in portfolio settings. Both of these
shortcomings are addressed by the cVaR formulation. cVaR is indeed coherent,
and can be optimized by convex optimization (namely, linear programming).
Chapter 1.3.9 describes the very intriguing close connections between the cVaR
measure of risk and support vector regression in machine learning, which allows
measure of risk and support vector regression in machine learning, which allows
the authors to establish out-of-sample results for cVaR portfolio selection based
on statistical learning theory. Chapter 1.3.9 provides an overview of a number of
regression formulations with applications in finance that rely on different loss
functions, including quantile regression and the cVaR metric as a loss measure.
The issue of characterizing statistical dependence and the inadequacy of jointly
Gaussian models has been of central interest in finance. A number of approaches
based on elliptical distributions, robust measures of correlation and tail
dependence, and the copula-modeling framework have been introduced in the
financial econometrics literature as potential solutions (McNeil et al., 2015).
Chapter 1.3.7 provides a thorough overview of these ideas. Modeling correlated
events (e.g., defaults or jumps) requires an entirely different set of tools. An
approach based on correlated Poisson processes is presented in Chapter 1.3.8.
Another critical aspect of modeling financial data is the handling of
nonstationarity. Chapter 1.3.6 describes the problem of modeling the
nonstationarity in volatility (i.e. stochastic volatility). An alternative framework
based on autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity models (ARCH and
GARCH) is described in Chapter 1.3.7.

1.3 Overview of the Chapters
1.3.1 Chapter 2: “Sparse Markowitz Portfolios” by Christine
De Mol
Sparse Markowitz portfolios impose an additional requirement of sparsity to the
objectives of risk and expected return in traditional Markowitz portfolios. The
chapter starts with an overview of the Markowitz portfolio formulation and
describes its fragility in high-dimensional settings. The author argues that
sparsity of the portfolio can alleviate many of the shortcomings, and presents an
optimization formulation based on convex relaxations. Other related problems,
including sparse portfolio rebalancing and combining multiple forecasts, are also
introduced in the chapter.

1.3.2 Chapter 3: “Mean-Reverting Portfolios: Tradeoffs
between Sparsity and Volatility” by Marco Cuturi and
Alexandre d'Aspremont
Statistical arbitrage strategies attempt to find portfolios that exhibit mean
reversion. A common econometric tool to find mean reverting portfolios is based
on co-integration. The authors argue that sparsity and high volatility are other
crucial considerations for statistical arbitrage, and describe a formulation to
balance these objectives using semidefinite programming (SDP) relaxations.

1.3.3 Chapter 4: “Temporal Causal Modeling” by
Prabhanjan Kambadur, Aurélie C. Lozano, and Ronny Luss
This chapter revisits the old maxim that correlation is not causation, and extends
the definition of Granger causality to high-dimensional multivariate time series
by defining graphical Granger causality as a tool for temporal causal modeling
(TCM). After discussing computational and statistical issues, the authors extend
TCM to robust quantile loss functions and consider regime changes using a
Markov switching framework.

1.3.4 Chapter 5: “Explicit Kernel and Sparsity of Eigen
Subspace for the AR(1) Process” by Mustafa U. Torun,
Onur Yilmaz and Ali N. Akansu
The closed-form kernel expressions for the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the
AR(1) discrete process are derived in this chapter. The sparsity of its eigen
subspace is investigated. Then, a new method based on rate-distortion theory to
find a sparse subspace is introduced. Its superior performance over a few well-
known sparsity methods is shown for the AR(1) source as well as for the
empirical correlation matrix of stock returns in the NASDAQ-100 index.

1.3.5 Chapter 6: “Approaches to High-Dimensional
Covariance and Precision Matrix Estimation” by Jianqing
Fan, Yuan Liao, and Han Liu
Covariance estimation presents significant challenges in high-dimensional
settings. The authors provide an overview of a variety of powerful approaches
for covariance estimation based on approximate factor models, sparse
covariance, and sparse precision matrix models. Applications to large-scale
portfolio management and testing mean-variance efficiency are considered.

1.3.6 Chapter 7: “Stochastic Volatility: Modeling and
Asymptotic Approaches to Option Pricing and Portfolio
Selection” by Matthew Lorig and Ronnie Sircar
The dynamic and uncertain nature of market volatility is one of the important
incarnations of nonstationarity in financial time series. This chapter starts by
reviewing the Black–Scholes formulation and the notion of implied volatility,
and discusses local and stochastic models of volatility and their asymptotic
analysis. The authors discuss implications of stochastic volatility models for
option pricing and investment strategies.

1.3.7 Chapter 8: “Statistical Measures of Dependence for
Financial Data” by David S. Matteson, Nicholas A. James,
and William B. Nicholson
Idealized models such as jointly Gaussian distributions are rarely appropriate for
real financial time series. This chapter describes a variety of more realistic
statistical models to capture cross-sectional and temporal dependence in
financial time series. Starting with robust measures of correlation and
autocorrelation, the authors move on to describe scalar and vector models for
serial correlation and heteroscedasticity, and then introduce copula models, tail
dependence, and multivariate copula models based on vines.

1.3.8 Chapter 9: “Correlated Poisson Processes and Their
Applications in Financial Modeling” by Alexander Kreinin
Jump-diffusion processes have been popular among practitioners as models for
equity derivatives and other financial instruments. Modeling the dependence of
jump-diffusion processes is considerably more challenging than that of jointly
Gaussian diffusion models where the positive-definiteness of the covariance
matrix is the only requirement. This chapter introduces a framework for
modeling correlated Poisson processes that relies on extreme joint distributions
and backward simulation, and discusses its application to financial risk
management.

1.3.9 Chapter 10: “CVaR Minimizations in Support Vector
Machines” by Junya Gotoh and Akiko Takeda
This chapter establishes intriguing connections between the literature on cVaR
optimization in finance, and the support vector machine formulation for
regularized empirical risk minimization from the machine-learning literature.
Among other insights, this connection allows the establishment of out-of-sample
bounds on cVaR risk forecasts. The authors further discuss robust extensions of
the cVaR formulation.
1.3.10 Chapter 11: “Regression Models in Risk
Management” by Stan Uryasev
Regression models are one of the most widely used tools in quantitative finance.
This chapter presents a general framework for linear regression based on
minimizing a rich class of error measures for regression residuals subject to
constraints on regression coefficients. The discussion starts with least squares
linear regression, and includes many important variants such as median
regression, quantile regression, mixed quantile regression, and robust regression
as special cases. A number of applications are considered such as financial index
tracking, sparse signal reconstruction, mutual fund return-based style
classification, and mortgage pipeline hedging, among others.


1.4 Other Topics in Financial Signal Processing
and Machine Learning
We have left out a number of very interesting topics that all could fit very well
within the scope of this book. Here, we briefly provide the reader some pointers
for further study.
In practice, the expected returns and the covariance matrices used in portfolio
strategies are typically estimated based on recent windows of historical data and,
hence, pose significant uncertainty. It behooves a careful portfolio manager to be
cognizant of the sensitivity of portfolio allocation strategies to these estimation
errors. The field of robust portfolio optimization attempts to characterize this
sensitivity and propose strategies that are more stable with respect to modeling
errors (Goldfarb and Iyengar, 2003).
The study of market microstructure and the development of high-frequency
trading strategies and aggressive directional and market-making strategies rely
on short-term predictions of prices and market activity. A recent overview in
Kearns and Nevmyvaka (2013) describes many of the issues involved.
Managers of large portfolios such as pension funds and mutual funds often need
to execute very large trades that cannot be traded instantaneously in the market
without causing a dramatic market impact. The field of optimal order execution
studies how to split a large order into a sequence of carefully timed small orders
in order to minimize the market impact but still execute the order in a timely
manner (Almgren and Chriss, 2001; Bertsimas and Lo, 1998). The solutions for
such a problem involve ideas from stochastic optimal control.
Various financial instruments exhibit specific structures that require dedicated
mathematical models. For example, fixed income instruments depend on the
movements of various interest-rate curves at different ratings (Brigo and
Mercurio, 2007), options prices depend on volatility surfaces (Gatheral, 2011),
and foreign exchange rates are traded via a graph of currency pairs. Stocks do
not have such a rich mathematical structure, but they can be modeled by their
industry, style, and other common characteristics. This gives rise to fundamental
or statistical factor models (Darolles et al., 2013).
A critical driver for market activity is the release of news, reflecting
developments in the industry, economic, and political sectors that affect the price
of a security. Traditionally, traders act upon this information after reading an
article and evaluating its significance and impact on their portfolio. With the
availability of large amounts of information online, the advent of natural
language processing, and the need for rapid decision making, many financial
institutions have already started to explore automated decision-making and
trading strategies based on computer interpretation of relevant news (Bollen et
al., 2011; Luss and d'Aspremont, 2008) ranging from simple sentiment analysis
to deeper semantic analysis and entity extraction.

References
Akansu, A.N., Kulkarni, S.R., Avellaneda, M.M. and Barron, A.R. (2012).
Special issue on signal processing methods in finance and electronic trading.
IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, 6(4).
Akansu, A.N. and Torun, M. (2015). A primer for financial engineering:
financial signal processing and electronic trading. New York: Academic-
Elsevier.
Almgren, R. and Chriss, N. (2001). Optimal execution of portfolio transactions.
Journal of Risk, 3, pp. 5–40.
Bertsimas, D. and Lo, A.W. (1998). Optimal control of execution costs. Journal
of Financial Markets, 1(1), pp. 1–50.
Black, F. and Litterman, R. (1992). Global portfolio optimization. Financial
Analysts Journal, 48(5), pp. 28–43.
Black, F. and Scholes, M. (1973). The pricing of options and corporate
liabilities. Journal of Political Economy, 81(3), p. 637.
Bollen, J., Mao, H. and Zeng, X. (2011). Twitter mood predicts the stock market.
Journal of Computational Science, 2(1), pp. 1–8.
Brigo, D. and Mercurio, F. (2007). Interest Rate Models – Theory and Practice:
With Smile, Inflation and Credit. Berlin: Springer Science & Business Media.
Chen, S., Donoho, D. and Saunders, M. (1998). Atomic decomposition by basis
pursuit. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 20(1), pp. 33–61.
Cover, T. and Ordentlich, E. (1996). Universal portfolios with side information.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 42(2), pp. 348–363.
Darolles, S., Duvaut, P. and Jay, E. (2013). Multi-factor Models and Signal
Processing Techniques: Application to Quantitative Finance. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons.
El Karoui, N. (2013). On the realized risk of high-dimensional Markowitz
portfolios. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics, 4(1), 737–783.
Engle, R. (1982). Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with estimates of
the variance of United Kingdom inflation. Econometrica: Journal of the
Econometric Society, 50(4), pp. 987–1007.
Fama, E. and French, K. (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks
and bonds. Journal of Financial Economics, 33(1), pp. 3–56.
Gatheral, J. (2011). The Volatility Surface: A Practitioner's Guide. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons.
Goldfarb, D. and Iyengar, G. (2003). Robust portfolio selection problems.
Mathematics of Operations Research, 28(1), pp. 1–38.
Harris, L. (2002). Trading and Exchanges: Market Microstructure for
Practitioners. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hull, J. (2011). Options, Futures, and Other Derivatives. Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Pearson.
Hull, J. and White, A. (1987). The pricing of options on assets with stochastic
volatilities. The Journal of Finance, 42(2), 281–300.
Kearns, M. and Nevmyvaka, Y. (2013). Machine learning for market
microstructure and high frequency trading. In High-frequency trading – New
realities for traders, markets and regulators (ed. O'Hara, M., de Prado, M.L. and
Easley, D.). London: Risk Books, pp. 91–124.
Luss, R. and d'Aspremont, A. (2008). Support vector machine classification with
indefinite kernels. In Advances in neural information processing systems 20 (ed.
Platt, J., Koller, D., Singer, Y. and Roweis, S.). Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, pp.
953–960.
Mallat, S.G. and Zhang, Z. (1993). Matching pursuits with time-frequency
dictionaries. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 41(12), 3397–3415.
Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio selection. The Journal of Finance, 7(1), 77–91.
McNeil, A.J., Frey, R. and Embrechts, P. (2015). Quantitative risk management:
concepts, techniques and tools. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
O'Hara, M. (1995). Market Microstructure Theory. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Pollak, I., Avellaneda, M.M., Bacry, E., Cont, R. and Kulkarni, S.R. (2011).
Special issue on signal processing for financial applications. IEEE Signal
Processing Magazine, 28(5).
Rockafellar, R. and Uryasev, S. (2000). Optimization of conditional value-at-
risk. Journal of Risk, 2, 21–42.
Roncalli, T. (2013). Introduction to risk parity and budgeting. Boca Raton, FL:
CRC Press.
Tibshirani, R. (1996). Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 58(1), 267–288.
1 There are other types of risk, including credit risk, liquidity risk, model risk,

   and systemic risk, that may also need to be considered by market participants.
2 We refer the readers to a number of other important topics at the end of this

   chapter that we could not fit into the book.
Chapter 2
Sparse Markowitz Portfolios
   Christine De Mol
   Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium

2.1 Markowitz Portfolios
Modern portfolio theory originated from the work of Markowitz (1952), who
insisted on the fact that returns should be balanced with risk and established the
theoretical basis for portfolio optimization according to this principle. The
portfolios are to be composed from a universe of securities with returns at
time given by ,                  , and assumed to be stationary. We denote by
          the        vector of the expected returns of the different assets, and by
                        the covariance matrix of the returns ( is the transpose
of ).
A portfolio is characterized by a       vector of weights                    , where
   is the amount of capital to be invested in asset number . Traditionally, it is
assumed that a fixed capital, normalized to one, is available and should be fully
invested. Hence the weights are required to sum to one:              , or else
         , where     denotes the       vector with all entries equal to 1. For a
given portfolio , the expected return is then equal to       , whereas its variance,
which serves as a measure of risk, is given by        . Following Markowitz, the
standard paradigm in portfolio optimization is to find a portfolio that has
minimal variance for a given expected return            . More precisely, one seeks
   such that:

                                                                                 2.1




The constraint that the weights should sum to one can be dropped when
including also in the portfolio a risk-free asset, with fixed return , in which one
invests a fraction    of the unit capital, so that
                                                                                   2.2
The return of the combined portfolio is then given by

                                                                                   2.3
Hence we can reason in terms of “excess return” of this portfolio, which is given
by      where the “excess returns” are defined as              . The “excess
expected returns” are then                                . The Markowitz
optimal portfolio weights in this setting are solving

                                                                                   2.4



with the same covariance matrix as in (2.1) since the return of the risk-free asset
is purely deterministic instead of stochastic. The weight corresponding to the
risk-free asset is adjusted as                (and is not included in the weight
vector ). Introducing a Lagrange parameter and fixing it in order to satisfy the
linear constraint, one easily sees that

                                                                                   2.5

assuming that is strictly positive definite so that its inverse exists. This means
that, whatever the value of the excess target return , the weights of the optimal
portfolio are proportional to      . The corresponding variance is given by

                                                                                   2.6

which implies that, when varying , the optimal portfolios lie on a straight line
in the plane     , called the capital market line or efficient frontier, the slope of
which is referred to as the Sharpe ratio:

                                                                                   2.7

We also see that all efficient portfolios (i.e, those lying on the efficient frontier)
can be obtained by combining linearly the portfolio containing only the risk-free
asset, with weight          , and any other efficient portfolio, with weights .
The weights of the efficient portfolio, which contains only risky assets, are then
derived by renormalization as             , with of course           . This
phenomenon is often referred to as Tobin's two-fund separation theorem. The
portfolios on the frontier to the right of this last portfolio require a short position
on the risk-free asset         , meaning that money is borrowed at the risk-free
rate to buy risky assets.
Notice that in the absence of a risk-free asset, the efficient frontier composed by
the optimal portfolios satisfying (2.1), with weights required to sum to one, is
slightly more complicated: it is a parabola in the variance – return plane
that becomes a “Markowitz bullet” in the plane          . By introducing two
Lagrange parameters for the two linear constraints, one can derive the expression
of the optimal weights, which are a linear combination of            and      ,
generalizing Tobin's theorem in the sense that any portfolio on the efficient
frontier can be expressed as a linear combination of two arbitrary ones on the
same frontier.
The Markowitz portfolio optimization problem can also be reformulated as a
regression problem, as noted by Brodie et al. (2009). Indeed, we have
                 , so that the minimization problem (2.1) is equivalent to

                                                                                    2.8




Let us remark that when using excess returns, there is no need to implement the
constraints since the minimization of               (for any constant ) is easily
shown todeliver weights proportional to       , which by renormalization
correspond to a portfolio on the capital market line.
In practice, for empirical implementations, one needs to estimate the returns as
well as the covariance matrix and to plug in the resulting estimates in all the
expressions above. Usually, expectations are replaced by sample averages (i.e.,
for the returns by              and for the covariance matrix by
                       ).
For the regression formulation, we define to be the         matrix of which row
  is given by , namely                 . The optimization problem (2.8) is then
replaced by
                                                                                     2.9




where       denotes the squared Euclidean norm             of the vector   in    .
There are many possible variations in the formulation of the Markowitz portfolio
optimization problem, but they are not essential for the message we want to
convey. Moreover, although lots of papers in the literature on portfolio theory
have explored other risk measures, for example more robust ones, we will only
consider here the traditional framework where risk is measured by the variance.
For a broader picture, see for example the books by Campbell et al. (1997) and
Ruppert (2004).

2.2 Portfolio Optimization as an Inverse
Problem: The Need for Regularization
Despite its elegance, it is well known that the Markowitz theory has to face
several difficulties when implemented in practice, as soon as the number of
assets in the portfolio gets large. There has been extensive effort in recent
years to explain the origin of such difficulties and to propose remedies.
Interestingly, DeMiguel et al. (2009a) have assessed several optimization
procedures proposed in the literature and shown that, surprisingly, they do not
clearly outperform the “naive” (also called “Talmudic”) strategy, which consists
in attributing equal weights, namely       , to all assets in the portfolio. The fact
that this naive strategy is hard to beat—and therefore constitutes a tough
benchmark – is sometimes referred to as the           puzzle.
A natural explanation for these difficulties comes in mind when noticing, as
done by Brodie et al. (2009), that the determination of the optimal weights
solving problem (2.1) or (2.4) can be viewed as an inverse problem, requiring
the inversion of the covariance matrix or, in practice, of its estimate . In the
presence of collinearity between the returns, this matrix is most likely to be “ill-
conditioned.” The same is true for the regression formulation (2.9) where it is
the matrix       which has to be inverted. Let us recall that the condition number
of a matrix is defined as the ratio of the largest to the smallest of its singular
values (or eigenvalues when it is symmetric). If this ratio is small, the matrix can
be easily inverted, and the corresponding weights can be computed numerically
in a stable way. However, when the condition number gets large, the usual
numerical inversion procedures will deliver unstable results, due to the
amplification of small errors (e.g., rounding errors would be enough) in the
eigendirections correponding to the smallest singular or eigenvalues. Since,
typically, asset returns tend to be highly correlated, the condition number will be
large, leading to numerically unstable, hence unreliable, estimates of the weight
vector . As a consequence, some of the computed weights can take very large
values, including large negative values corresponding to short positions.
Contrary to what is often claimed in the literature, let us stress the fact that
improving the estimation of the returns and of the covariance matrix will not
really solve the problem. Indeed, in inverting a true (population) but large
covariance matrix, we would have to face the same kind of ill-conditioning as
with empirical estimates, except for very special models such as the identity
matrix or a well-conditioned diagonal matrix. Such models, however, cannot be
expected to be very realistic.
A standard way to deal with inverse problems in the presence of ill-conditioning
of the matrix to be inverted is provided by so-called regularization methods. The
idea is to include additional constraints on the solution of the inverse problem
(here, the weight vector) that will prevent the error amplification due to ill-
conditioning and hence allow one to obtain meaningful, stable estimates of the
weights. These constraints are expected, as far as possible, to represent prior
knowledge about the solution of the problem under consideration. Alternatively,
one can add a penalty to the objective function. It is this strategy that we will
adopt here, noticing that most often, equivalence results with a constrained
formulation can be established as long as we deal with convex optimization
problems. For more details about regularization techniques for inverse problems,
we refer to the book by Bertero and Boccacci (1998).
A classical procedure for stabilizing least-squares problems is to use a quadratic
penalty, the simplest instance being the squared     norm of the weight vector:
                . It goes under the name of Tikhonov regularization in inverse
problem theory and of ridge regression in statistics. Such a penalty can be added
to regularize any of the optimization problems considered in Section 2.1. For
example, using a risk-free asset, let us consider problem (2.4) and replace it by

                                                                               2.10
where is a positive parameter, called the regularization parameter, allowing
one to tune the balance between the variance term and the penalty. Using a
Lagrange parameter and fixing its value to satisfy the linear constraint, we get
the explicit solution

                                                                                2.11

where denotes the          identity matrix. Hence, the weights of the “ridge”
optimal portfolio are proportional to          , whatever the value of the
excess target return . The corresponding variance is given by

                                                                                2.12

which implies that, when is fixed, is again proportional to and that the
efficient ridge portfolios also lie on a straight line in the plane    , generalizing
Tobin's theorem to this setting. Notice that its slope, the Sharpe ratio, does
depend on the value of the regularization parameter .
Another standard regularization procedure, called truncated singular value
decomposition, (TSVD), consists of diagonalizing the covariance matrix and
using for the inversion only the subspace spanned by the eigenvectors
corresponding to the largest eigenvalues (e.g., the largest). This is also
referred to as reduced-rank or principal-components regression. and it
corresponds to replacing in the formulas (2.11, 2.12) the regularized inverse
           by          , where       is the diagonal matrix containing the largest
eigenvalues of and             is the         matrix containing the corresponding
orthonormalized eigenvectors. Whereas this method implements a sharp (binary)
cutoff on the eigenvalue spectrum of the covariance matrix, notice that ridge
regression involves instead a smoother filtering of this spectrum where the
eigenvalues (positive since is positive definite) are replaced by               or,
equivalently, in the inversion process,         isreplaced by                     ,
where                      is a filtering, attenuation, or “shrinkage” factor,
comprised between 0 and 1, allowing one to control the instabilities generated by
division by the smallest eigenvalues. More general types of filtering factors can
be used to regularize the problem. We refer the reader, for example, to the paper
by De Mol et al. (2008) for a discussion of the link between principal
components and ridge regression in the context of forecasting of high-
dimensional time series, and to the paper by Carrasco and Noumon (2012) for a
broader analysis of linear regularization methods, including an iterative method
called Landweber's iteration, in the context of portfolio theory.
Regularized versions of the problems (2.1) and (2.9) can be defined and solved
in a similar way as for (2.4). Tikhonov's regularization method has also been
applied to the estimation of the covariance matrix by Park and O'Leary (2010).
Let us remark that there are many other methods, proposed in the literature to
stabilize the construction of Markowitz portfolios, which can be viewed as a
form of explicit or implicit regularization, including Bayesian techniques as used
for example in the so-called Black–Litterman model. However, they are usually
more complicated, and reviewing them would go beyond the scope of this
chapter.

2.3 Sparse Portfolios
As discussed in Section 2.2, regularization methods such as rigde regression or
TSVD allow one to define and compute stable weights for Markowitz portfolios.
The resulting vector of regularized weights generically has all its entries
different from zero, even if there may be a lot of small values. This would oblige
the investor to buy a certain amount of each security, which is not necessarily a
convenient strategy for small investors. Brodie et al. (2009) have proposed to
use instead a regularization based on a penalty that enforces sparsity of the
weight vector, namely the presence of many zero entries in that vector,
corresponding to assets that will not be included in the portfolio. More precisely,
they introduce in the optimization problem, formulated as (2.9), a penalty on the
   norm of the vector of weights , defined by                    . This problem
then becomes

                                                                              2.13




where the regularization parameter is denoted by . Note that the factor
from (2.9) has been absorbed in the parameter . When removing the
constraints, a problem of this kind is referred to as lasso regression, after
Tibshirani (1996). Lasso, an acronym for least absolute shrinkage and selection
operator, helps by reminding that it allows for variable (here, asset) selection
since it favors the recovery of sparse vectors (i.e., vectors containing many
zero entries, the position of which, however, is not known in advance). This
sparsifying effect is also widely used nowadays in signal and image processing
(see, e.g., the review paper by Chen et al. (2001) and the references therein).
As argued by Brodie et al. (2009), besides its sparsity-enforcing properties, the
   -norm penalty offers the advantage of being a good model for the transaction
costs incurred to compose the portfolio, costs that are not at all taken into
account in the Markowitz original framework. Indeed, these can be assumed to
be roughly proportional, for a given asset, to the amount of the transaction,
whether buying or short-selling, and hence to the absolute value of the portfolio
weight . There may be an additional fixed fee, however, which would then be
proportional to the number of assets to include in the portfolio (i.e.,
proportional to the cardinality of the portfolio, or the number of its nonzero
entries, sometimes also called by abuse of language the “norm” (             ) of the
weight vector ). Usually, however, such fees can be neglected. Let us remark,
moreover, that implementing a cardinality penalty or constraint would render the
portfolio optimization problem very cumbersome (i.e., nonconvex and of
combinatorial complexity). It has become a standard practice to use the norm
      as a “convex relaxation” for       . Under appropriate assumptions, there
even exist some theoretical guarantees that both penalties will actually deliver
the same answer (see, e.g., the book on compressive sensing by Foucart and
Rauhut (2013) and the references therein).
Let us remark that, in problem (2.13), it is actually the amount of “shorting” that
is regulated; indeed, because of the constraint that the weights should add to one,
the objective function can be rewritten as

                                                                                 2.14

in which the last term, being constant, is of course irrelevant for determining the
solution. In this setting, we see that the -norm penalty is equivalent to a
penalty on the negative weights (i.e., on the short positions), only. In the limit of
very large values of the regularization parameter , we get, as a special case, a
portfolio with only positive weights (i.e., no short positions). Such no-short
optimal portfolios had been considered previously in the financial literature by
Jagannathan and Ma (2003) and were known for their good performances, but,
surprisingly, their sparse character had gone unnoticed. As shown by Brodie et
al. (2009), these no-short portfolios, obtained for the largest values of , are
typically also the sparsest in the family defined by (2.13). When decreasing
beyond some point, negative weights start to appear, but the -norm penalty
allows one to control their size and to ensure numerical stability of the portfolio
weights. The regularizing properties of the -norm penalty (or constraint) for
high-dimensional regression problems in the presence of collinearity is well
known since the paper by Tibshirani (1996), and the fact that the lasso strategy
yields a proper regularization method (as is the quadratic Tikhonov
regularization method) even in an infinite-dimensional framework has been
established by Daubechies et al. (2004). Notice that these results were derived in
an unconstrained setting, but the presence of additional linear constraints can
only reinforce the regularization effect. A paper by Rosenbaum and Tsybakov
(2010) investigates the effect of errors on the matrix of the returns.
Compared to more classical linear regularization techniques (e.g., by means of a
   -norm penalty), the lasso approach not only presents advantages as described
above but also has some drawbacks. A first problem is that the -norm penalty
enforces a nonlinear shrinkage of the portfolio weights that renders the
determination of the efficient frontier much more difficult than in the
unpenalized case or in the case of ridge regression. For any given value of ,
such frontier ought to be computed point by point by solving (2.13) for different
values of the target return . Another difficulty is that, though still convex, the
optimization problem (2.13) is more challenging and, in particular, does not
admit a closed-form solution. There are several possibilities to solve numerically
the resulting quadratic program. Brodie et al. (2009) used the homotopy method
developed by Osborne et al. (2000a, 2000b), also known as the least-angle
regression (LARS) algorithm by Efron et al. (2004). This algorithm proceeds by
decreasing the value of progressively from very large values, exploiting the
fact that the dependence of the optimal weight on is piecewise linear. It is very
fast if the number of active assets (nonzero weights) is small. Because of the two
additional constraints, a modification of this algorithm was devised by Brodie et
al. (2009) to make it suitable for solving the portfolio optimization problem
(2.13). For the technical details, we refer the interested reader to the
supplementary appendix of that paper.

2.4 Empirical Validation
The sparse portfolio methodology described in the previous Section 2.3 has been
validated by an empirical exercise, the results of which are succinctly described
here. For a complete description, we refer the reader to the original paper by
Brodie et al. (2009).
Sparse portfolios were constructed using two benchmark datasets compiled by
Fama and French and available from the site
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html. They
are ensembles of 48 and 100 portfolios and will be referred to as FF48 and
FF100, respectively. The out-of-sample performances of the portfolios
constructed by solving (2.13) were assessed and compared to the tough
benchmark of the Talmudic or equal-weight portfolios for the same period.
Using annualized monthly returns from the FF48 and FF100 datasets, the
following simulated investment exercise was performed over a period of 30
years between 1976 and 2006. In June of each year, sparse optimal portfolios
were constructed for a wide range of values of the regularization parameter in
order to get different levels of sparsity, namely portfolios containing different
numbers of active positions. To run the regression, historical data from the
preceding 5 years (60 months) were used. At the time of each portfolio
construction, the target return, , was set to be the average return achieved by
the naive, equal-weight portfolio over the same historical period. Once
constructed, the portfolios were held until June of the next year, and their
monthly out-of-sample returns were observed. The same exercise was repeated
each year until June 2005. All the observed monthly returns of the portfolios
form a time series from which one can compute the average monthly return
(over the whole period or a subperiod), the corresponding standard deviation ,
and the Sharpe ratio          . We report some Sharpe ratios obtained when
averaging over the whole period 1976–2006. For FF48, the best one was
and was obtained with the no-short portfolio, comprising a number of active
assets varying over the years, but typically ranging between 4 and 10. Then,
when looking at the performances of sparse portfolios with a given number of
active positions, their Sharpe ratios, lower than for the no-short portfolio,
decreased with , clearly outperforming the equal-weight benchmark (for which
       ) as long as        but falling below for larger. For FF100, a different
behavior was observed. The Sharpe ratios were maximum and of the order of 40
for a number of active positions around 30, thus including short positions,
whereas          for the no-short portfolio. The sparse portfolios were
outperforming the equal-weight benchmark with              as long as        .
In parallel and independently of the paper by Brodie et al. (2009), DeMiguel et
al. (2009b) performed an extensive comparison of the improvement in terms of
the Sharpe ratio obtained through various portfolio construction methods, and in
particular by imposing constraints on some specific norm of the weight vector,
including     and norms. Subsequent papers confirmed the good performances
of the sparse portfolios, also on other and larger datasets and in somewhat
different frameworks, such as those by Fan et al. (2012), by Gandy and Veraart
(2013) and by Henriques and Ortega (2014).

2.5 Variations on the Theme
2.5.1 Portfolio Rebalancing
The empirical exercise described in Section 2.4 is not very realistic in
representing the behaviour of a single investor since a sparse portfolio would be
constructed from scratch each year. Its aim was rather to assess the validity of
the investment strategy, as it would be carried out by different investors using
the same methodology in different years.
More realistically, an investor already holding a portfolio with weights would
like to adjust it to increase its performance. This means that one should look for
an adjustment        , so that the new rebalanced portfolio weights are      . The
incurred transaction costs concern only the adjustment and hence can be
modelled by the norm of the vector            . This means that we must now solve
the following optimization problem:




ensuring sparsity in the number of weights to be adjusted and conservation of the
total unit capital invested as well as of the target return. The methodology
proposed by Brodie et al. (2009) can be straightforwardly modified to solve this
problem. An empirical exercise on sparse portfolio rebalancing is described by
Henriques and Ortega (2014).

2.5.2 Portfolio Replication or Index Tracking
In some circumstances, an investor may want to construct a portfolio that
replicates the performances of a given portfolio or of a financial index such as
the S&P 500, but is easier to manage, for example because it contains less assets.
In such a case, the investor will have at his disposal a time series of index values
or global portfolio historical returns, which can be put in a         column vector
  . The time series of historical returns of the assets that he can use toreplicate
will be put in a       matrix , as before. The problem can then be formulated
as the minimization of the mean square tracking error augmented by a penalty on
the norm of , representing the transaction costs and enforcing sparsity:

                                                                                  2.15



This is a constrained lasso regression that can again be solved by means of the
methodology described in Section 2.3. A rebalancing version of this tracking
problem could also be implemented.

2.5.3 Other Penalties and Portfolio Norms
A straightforward modification of the previous scheme consists of introducing
weights in the norm used as penalty (i.e. replacing it with):

                                                                                  2.16


where the positive weights can model either differences in transaction costs or
some preferences of the investor. Another extension, considered for example by
Daubechies et al. (2004) for unconstrained lasso regression, is to use -norm
penalties with        , namely of the type

                                                                                  2.17


yielding as special cases lasso for    or ridge regression for      . The use of
values of less than 1 in (2.17) would reinforce the sparsifying effect of the
penalty but would render the optimization problem nonconvex and therefore alot
more cumbersome.
A well-known drawback of variable selection methods relying on an -norm
penalty or constraint is the instability in selection in the presence of collinearity
among the variables. This means that, in the empirical exercise described here,
when recomposing each year a new portfolio, the selection will not be stable
over time within a group of potentially correlated assets. The same effect has
been noted by De Mol et al. (2008) when forecasting macroeconomic variables
based on a large ensemble of time series. When the goal is forecasting and not
variable selection, such effect is not harmful and would not, for example, affect
the out-of-sample returns of a portfolio. When stability in the selection matters,
however, a possible remedy to this problem is the so-called elastic net strategy
proposed by Zou and Hastie (2005) which consists of adding to the -norm
penalty a -norm penalty, the role of which is to enforce democracy in the
selection within a group of correlated assets. Since all assets in the group thus
tend to be selected, it is clear that, though still sparse, the solution of the scheme
using both penalties will in general be less sparse than when using the -norm
penalty alone. An application of this strategy to portfolio theory is considered by
Li (2014).
Notice that for applying the elastic net strategy as a safeguard against selection
instabilities, there is no need to know in advance which are the groups of
correlated variables. When the groups are known, one may want to select the
complete group composed of variables or assets belonging to some predefined
category. A way to achieve this is to use the so-called mixed          norm,
namely

                                                                                 2.18

where the index runs over the predefined groups and the index runs inside
each group. Such strategy, called “group lasso” by Yuan and Lin (2006), will
sparsify the groups but select all variables within a selected group. For more
details about these norms ensuring “structured sparsity” and the related
algorithmic aspects, see, for example, the review paper by Bach et al. (2012).

2.6 Optimal Forecast Combination
The problem of sparse portfolio construction or replication bears strong
similarity with the problem of linearly combining individual forecasts in order to
improve reliability and accuracy, as noticed by Conflitti et al. (2015). These
forecasts can be judgemental (i.e., provided by experts asked in a survey to
provide forecasts of some economic variables such as inflation) or else be the
output of different quantitative prediction models.
The idea is quite old, dating back to Bates and Granger (1969) and Granger and
Ramanathan (1984), and has been extensively discussed in the literature (see,
e.g., the review by Clemen 1989 and Timmermann 2006).
The problem can be formulated as follows. We denote by          the variable to be
forecast at time , assuming that the desired forecast horizon is . We have at
hand forecasters, each delivering at time a forecast            , using the
information about they have at time . We form with these individual
forecasts                 , the     -dimensional vector        . These forecasts are
then linearly combined using time-independent weights                     , which are
assumed to satisfy the contraints        and             , and which are put into
the       vector . The aim is to minimize the mean square forecast error
                  achieved by the combination. In empirical applications, the
expectation is replaced by the sample mean over some historical period for
which both the forecasts and the realization of the real variable are available.
Hence the optimal forecast combination problem can be formulated as

                                                                                2.19




assuming that the variable is observed for            . The resulting combined
forecast for the variable at time         is then given by          .
With the vector of forecasts replacing the vector of returns, the problem is
analogous to the problem of portfolio tracking described in Section 2.5, but with
an additional no-shorting constraint. Besides, since by combining the two
constraints we see that the norm of the weight vector is fixed to one, problem
(2.19) is equivalent to

                                                                                2.20




for any value of the regularization parameter , which means that the weight
vector will be sparse. Hence we have to solve a constrained lasso regression, and
the modified LARS algorithm proposed by Brodie et al. (2009) can again be
used to this purpose. Notice, however, that the sparsity level cannot be tuned by
adjusting the value of . Possible remedies to this drawback would be to give up
the nonnegativity constraints on the weights or else to use exact sparse simplex
projections as in the paper by Kyrillidis et al. (2013).
An empirical exercise using survey data from the Survey of Professional
Forecasters (SPF) for the Euro area and concerning the forecast of inflation and
of GDP (Gross Domestic Product) growth is described in detail in the paper by
Conflitti et al. (2015). The findings are that the optimal combinations of more
than 50 individual forecasts perform well compared to the equal-weight
combinations currently used by the European Central Bank. Nevertheless, the
corresponding gains are relatively modest, which shows that the           puzzle
applies to this situation as well. The paper by Conflitti et al (2015) also
addresses the problem of optimally combining density forecasts, in which case
the least-squares objective function is replaced by a Kullback–Leibler
Information Criterion between densities or by a derived “log-score” criterion.

Acknowlegments
I would like to thank my coauthors of the sparse portfolio paper on which most
of the material of this chapter is based, namely Joshua Brodie, Ingrid
Daubechies, Domenico Giannone, and Ignace Loris. Useful comments by an
anonymous referee are also gratefully acknowledged.
This work was supported by the research contracts ARC-AUWB/2010-15/ULB-
11 and IAP P7/06 StUDys.


References
Bach, F., Jenatton, R., Mairal, F. and Obozinski, G. (2012). Structured sparsity
through convex optimization. Statistical Science, 27, 450–468.
Bates, J.M. and Granger, C.W.J. (1969). The combination of forecasts.
Operations Research Quarterly, 20, 451–468.
Bertero, M. and Boccacci, P. (1998). Introduction to inverse problems in
imaging. London: Institute of Physics Publishing.
Brodie, J., Daubechies, I., De Mol, C., Giannone, D. and Loris, I. (2009). Sparse
and stable Markowitz portfolios. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Science, 106 (30), 12267–12272.
Campbell, J.Y., Lo, A.W. and MacKinlay, C.A. (1997). The econometrics of
financial markets. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Carrasco, M. and Noumon, N. (2012). Optimal portfolio selection using
regularization.
https://www.webdepot.umontreal.ca/Usagers/carrascm/MonDepotPublic/carrascm/index.htm
Chen, S., Donoho, D. and Saunders, M. (2001). Atomic decomposition by basis
pursuit. SIAM Review, 43, 129–159.
Clemen, R.T. (1989). Combining economic forecasts: a review and annotated
bibliography. International Journal of Forecasting, 5, 559–583.
Conflitti, C., De Mol, C. and Giannone, D. (2015). Optimal combination of
survey forecasts. International Journal of Forecasting, 31, 1096–1103.
Daubechies, I., Defrise, M. and De Mol, C. (2004). An iterative thresholding
algorithm for linear inverse problems with a sparsity constraint. Communications
on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 57, 1416–1457.
DeMiguel, V., Garlappi, L. and Uppal, R. (2009a). Optimal versus naive
diversification: how inefficient is the 1/ portfolio strategy? Review of
Financial Studies, 22, 1915–1953.
DeMiguel, V., Garlappi, L., Nogales, F.J. and Uppal, R. (2009b). A generalized
approach to portfolio optimization: improving performance by constraining
portfolio norms. Management Science, 55, 798–812.
De Mol, C., Giannone, D. and Reichlin, L. (2008). Forecasting using a large
number of predictors: is Bayesian shrinkage a valid alternative to principal
components? Journal of Econometrics, 146, 318–328.
Efron, B., Hastie, T., Johnstone, I. and Tibshirani, R. (2004). Least angle
regression. Annals of Statistics, 32, 407–499.
Fan, J., Zhang, J. and Yu, K. (2012). Vast portfolio selection with gross-
exposure constraints. Journal of American Statistical Association, 107, 592–606.
Foucart, S. and Rauhut, H. (2013). A mathematical introduction to compressive
sensing. Basel: Birkhauser.
Gandy, A. and Veraart, L.A.M. (2013). The effect of estimation in high-
dimensional portfolios. Mathematical Finance, 23, 531–559.
Granger, C.W.J. and Ramanathan, R. (1984). Improved methods of combining
forecasts. Journal of Forecasting, 3, 197–204.
Henriques, J. and Ortega, J-P. (2014). Construction, management, and
performances of Markowitz sparse portfolios. Studies in Nonlinear Dynamics
and Econometrics, 18, 383–402.
Jagannathan, R. and Ma, T. (2003). Risk reduction in large portfolios: why
imposing the wrong constraints helps. Journal of Finance, 58, 1651–1684.
Kyrillidis, A., Becker, S., Cevher, V. and Koch, C. (2013). Sparse projections
onto the simplex. Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML 2013). JMLR W&CP, 28, 235–243.
Li, J. (2014). Sparse and stable portfolio selection with parameter uncertainty.
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 33, 381–392.
Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio selection. The Journal of Finance, 7, 77–91.
Osborne, M.R., Presnell, B. and Turlach, B.A. (2000a). A new approach to
variable selection in least squares problems. IMA Journal of Numerical Analysis,
20, 389–403.
Osborne, M.R., Presnell, B. and Turlach, B.A. (2000b). On the lasso and its dual.
Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 9, 319–337.
Park, S. and O'Leary, D.P. (2010). Portfolio selection using Tikhonov filtering to
estimate the covariance matrix. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics, 1,
932–961.
Rosenbaum, M. and Tsybakov, A.B. (2010). Sparse recovery under matrix
uncertainty. Annals of Statistics, 38, 2620–2651.
Ruppert, D. (2004). Statistics and finance: an introduction. Berlin: Springer.
Tibshirani, R. (1996). Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 58, 267–288.
Timmermann, A. (2006). Forecast combination: Handbook of economic
forecasting, Vol. 1 (ed. G. Elliott, C. Granger and A. Timmermann).
Amsterdam: North Holland.
Yuan, M. and Lin, Y. (2006). Model selection and estimation in regression with
grouped variables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 68, 49–67.
Zou, H. and Hastie, T. (2005). Regularization and variable selection via the
elastic net. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 67, 301–320.
Chapter 3
Mean-Reverting Portfolios
Tradeoffs between Sparsity and Volatility
   Marco Cuturi1 and Alexandre d'Aspremont2
   1Kyoto University, Japan
   2CNRS - Ecole Normale supérieure, France


Mean-reverting assets are one of the holy grails of financial markets: if such
assets existed, they would provide trivially profitable investment strategies for
any investor able to trade them, thanks to the knowledge that such assets
oscillate predictably around their long-term mean. The modus operandi of
cointegration-based trading strategies (Tsay, 2005, §8) is to create first a
portfolio of assets whose aggregate value mean-reverts, and then to exploit that
knowledge by selling short or buying that portfolio when its value deviates from
its long-term mean. Such portfolios are typically selected using tools from
cointegration theory (Engle and Granger, 1987; Johansen, 1991), whose aim is to
detect combinations of assets that are stationary and therefore mean-reverting.
We argue in this chapter that focusing on stationarity only may not suffice to
ensure profitability of cointegration-based strategies. While it might be possible
to create synthetically, using a large array of financial assets, a portfolio whose
aggregate value is stationary and therefore mean-reverting, trading such a large
portfolio incurs in practice important trade or borrow costs. Looking for
stationary portfolios formed by many assets may also result in portfolios that
have a very small volatility and that require significant leverage to be profitable.
We study in this chapter algorithmic approaches that can mitigate these effects
by searching for maximally mean-reverting portfolios that are sufficiently sparse
and/or volatile.

3.1 Introduction
Mean-reverting assets, namely assets whose price oscillates predictably around a
long-term mean, provide investors with an ideal investment opportunity.
Because of their tendency to pull back to a given price level, a naive contrarian
strategy of buying the asset when its price lies below that mean, or selling short
the asset when it lies above that mean, can be profitable. Unsurprisingly, assets
that exhibit significant mean reversion are very hard to find in efficient markets.
Whenever mean reversion is observed in a single asset, it is almost always
impossible to profit from it: the asset may typically have very low volatility, be
illiquid, or be hard to short-sell, or its mean reversion may occur at a time scale
(months, years) for which the borrow cost of holding or shorting the asset may
well exceed any profit expected from such a contrarian strategy.

3.1.1 Synthetic Mean-Reverting Baskets
Since mean-reverting assets rarely appear in liquid markets, investors have
focused instead on creating synthetic assets that can mimic the properties of a
single mean-reverting asset, and trading such synthetic assets as if they were a
single asset. Such a synthetic asset is typically designed by combining long and
short positions in various liquid assets to form a mean-reverting portfolio, whose
aggregate value exhibits significant mean reversion.
Constructing such synthetic portfolios is, however, challenging. Whereas simple
descriptive statistics and unit-root test procedures can be used to test whether a
single asset is mean-reverting, building mean-reverting portfolios requires
finding a proper vector of algebraic weights (long and short positions) that
describes a portfolio that has a mean-reverting aggregate value. In that sense,
mean-reverting portfolios are made by the investor and cannot be simply chosen
among tradable assets. A mean-reverting portfolio is characterized both by the
pool of assets the investor has selected (starting with the dimension of the
vector) and by the fixed nominal quantities (or weights) of each of these assets in
the portfolio, which the investor also needs to set. When only two assets are
considered, such baskets are usually known as long-short trading pairs. We
consider in this paper baskets that are constituted by more than two assets.

3.1.2 Mean-Reverting Baskets with Sufficient Volatility and
Sparsity
A mean-reverting portfolio must exhibit sufficient mean reversion to ensure that
a contrarian strategy is profitable. To meet this requirement, investors have
relied on cointegration theory (Engle and Granger, 1987; Johansen, 2005;
Maddala and Kim, 1998) to estimate linear combinations of assets that exhibit
stationarity (and therefore mean reversion) using historical data. We argue in this
chapter, as we did in earlier publications (Cuturi and d'Aspremont, 2013;
d'Aspremont, 2011), that mean-reverting strategies cannot, however, only rely
on this approach to be profitable. Arbitrage opportunities can only exist if they
are large enough to be traded without using too much leverage or incurring too
are large enough to be traded without using too much leverage or incurring too
many transaction costs. For mean-reverting baskets, this condition translates
naturally into a first requirement that the gap between the basket valuation and
its long-term mean is large enough on average, namely that the basket price has
sufficient variance or volatility. A second desirable property is that mean-
reverting portfolios require trading as few assets as possible to minimize costs,
namely that the weights vector of that portfolio is sparse. We propose in this
work methods that maximize a proxy for mean reversion, and that can take into
account at the same time constraints on variance and sparsity.
We propose first in Section 3.2 three proxies for mean reversion. Section 3.3
defines the basket optimization problems corresponding to these quantities. We
show in Section 3.4 that each of these problems translate naturally into
semidefinite relaxations that produce either exact or approximate solutions using
sparse principal component analysis (PCA) techniques. Finally, we present
numerical evidence in Section 3.5 that taking into account sparsity and volatility
can significantly boost the performance of mean-reverting trading strategies in
trading environments where trading costs are not negligible.

3.2 Proxies for Mean Reversion
Isolating stable linear combinations of variables of multivariate time series is a
fundamental problem in econometrics. A classical formulation of the problem
reads as follows: given a vector valued process          taking values in      and
indexed by time         , and making no assumptions on the stationarity of each
individual component of , can we estimate one or many directions              such
that the univariate process       is stationary? When such a vector exists, the
process is said to be cointegrated. The goal of cointegration techniques is to
detect and estimate such directions . Taking for granted that such techniques
can efficiently isolate sparse mean-reverting baskets, their financial application
can be either straightforward using simple event triggers to buy, sell, or simply
hold the basket (Tsay, 2005, §8.6), or more elaborate optimal trading strategies if
one assumes that the mean-reverting basket value is a Ohrstein–Ullenbeck
process, as discussed in Elie and Espinosa, (2011), Jurek and Yang (2007), and
Liu and Timmermann (2010).

3.2.1 Related Work and Problem Setting
Engle and Granger (1987) provided in their seminal work a first approach to
compare two nonstationary univariate time series     , and test for the
existence of a term such that            becomes stationary. Following this
seminal work, several techniques have been proposed to generalize that idea to
multivariate time series. As detailed in the survey by Maddala and Kim (1998,
§5), cointegration techniques differ in the modeling assumptions they require on
the time series themselves. Some are designed to identify only one cointegrated
relationship, whereas others are designed to detect many or all of them. Among
these references, Johansen (1991) proposed a popular approach that builds upon
a vector autoregression (VAR) model, as surveyed in Johansen (2004, 2005).
These approaches all discuss issues that are relevant to econometrics, such as
detrending and seasonal adjustments. Some of them focus more specifically on
testing procedures designed to check whether such cointegrated relationships
exist or not, rather than on the robustness of the estimation of that relationship
itself. We follow in this work a simpler approach proposed by d'Aspremont
(2011), which is to trade off interpretability, testing, and modeling assumptions
for a simpler optimization framework that can be tailored to include other
aspects than only stationarity. d'Aspremont (2011) did so by adding regularizers
to the predictability criterion proposed by Box and Tiao (1977). We follow in
this chapter the approach we proposed in Cuturi and d'Aspremont (2013) to
design mean reversion proxies that do not rely on any modeling assumption.
Throughout this chapter, we write     for the      cone of positive definite
matrices. We consider in the following a multivariate stochastic process
          taking values in . We write                      for the lag-
autocovariance matrix of if it is finite. Using a sample path of       , where
               and each        , we write for the empirical counterpart of
computed from ,

                                                                                 3.1


Given         , we now define three measures that can all be interpreted as
proxies for the mean reversion of       . Predictability –defined for stationary
processes by Box and Tiao (1977) and generalized for nonstationary processes
by Bewley et al. (1994) – measures how close to noise the series is. The
portmanteau statistic of Ljung and Box (1978) is used to test whether a process
is white noise. Finally, the crossing statistic (Ylvisaker, 1965) measures the
probability that a process crosses its mean per unit of time. In all three cases, low
values for these criteria imply a fast mean reversion.
3.2.2 Predictability
We briefly recall the canonical decomposition derived in Box and Tiao (1977).
Suppose that follows the recursion:

                                                                               3.2
where      is a predictor of built upon past values of the process recorded up
to     , and is a vector of independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.)
Gaussian noise with zero mean and covariance          independent of all
variables       . The canonical analysis in Box and Tiao (1977) starts as follows.

3.2.2.1 Univariate case
Suppose       and thus          ; Equation (3.2 ) leads thus to



by introducing the variances     and of and , respectively. Box and Tiao
measure the predictability of    by the ratio



The intuition behind this variance ratio is simple: when it is small, the variance
of the noise dominates that of     and is dominated by the noise term; when it
is large,    dominates the noise and can be accurately predicted on average.

3.2.2.2 Multivariate case
Suppose        , and consider now the univariate process       with weights
      . Using (3.2 ), we know that                   , and we can measure its
predicability as

                                                                                3.3

where     and    are the covariance matrices of and        , respectively.
Minimizing predictability     is then equivalent to finding the minimum
generalizedeigenvalue solving

                                                                                3.4
Assuming that     is positive definite, the basket with minimum predictability
will be given by            , where is the eigenvector corresponding to the
smallest eigenvalue of the matrix               .

3.2.2.3 Estimation of
All of the quantities used to define above need to be estimated from sample
paths.     can be estimated by following Equation (3.1). All other quantities
depend on the predictor       . Box and Tiao assume that follows a vector
autoregressive model of order –VAR(p), in short –and therefore        takes the
form,




where the matrices          contain each       autoregressive coefficient.
Estimating      from the sample path , Box and Tiao solve for the optimal
basket by inserting these estimates in the generalized eigenvalue problem
displayed in Equation (3.4). If one assumes that        (the case      can be
trivially reformulated as a VAR(1) model with adequate reparameterization),
then



and thus the Yule–Walker estimator (Lütkepohl, 2005, §3.3) of        would be
           . Minimizing predictability boils down to solving in that case




which is equivalent to computing the smallest eigenvector of the matrix
                  if the covariance matrix is invertible.
The machinery of Box and Tiao to quantify mean reversion requires defining a
model to form     , the conditional expectation of given previous
observations. We consider now two criteria that do without such modeling
assumptions.

3.2.3 Portmanteau Criterion
Recall that the portmanteau statistic of order   (Ljung and Box 1978) of a
centered univariate stationary process    (with       ) is given by




where                  is the th-order autocorrelation of . The portmanteau
statistic of a white noise process is by definition 0 for any . Given a
multivariate          process , we write




for a coefficient vector      . By construction,                for any    , and
in what follows, we will impose          . The quantities        are computed
using the following estimates (Hamilton, 1994, p. 110):

                                                                                  3.5


3.2.4 Crossing Statistics
Kedem and Yakowitz (1994, §4.1) define the zero crossing rate of a univariate
     process (its expected number of crosses around 0 per unit of time) as

                                                                                  3.6


A result known as the cosine formula states that if is an autoregressive process
of order 1 (AR(1)), namely if      , is i.i.d. standard Gaussian noise and
             , then (Kedem and Yakowitz, 1994, §4.2.2):



Hence, for AR(1) processes, minimizing the first-order autocorrelation also
directly maximizes the crossing rate of the process . For        , since the first-
order autocorrelation of      is equal to       , we propose to minimize
and ensure that all other absolute autocorrelations        ,       are small.
3.3 Optimal Baskets
Given a centered multivariate process , we form its covariance matrix        and
its autocovariances              . Because                      , we symmetrize
all autocovariance matrices . We investigate in this section the problem of
estimating baskets that have maximal mean reversion (as measured by the
proxies proposed in Section 3.2), while being at the same time sufficiently
volatile and supported by as few assets as possible. The latter will be achieved
by selecting portfolios that have a small “0-norm,” namely that the number of
nonzero components in ,



is small. The former will be achieved by selecting portfolios whose aggregated
value exhibits a variance over time that exceeds a given threshold      . Note
that for the variance of      to exceed a level , the largest eigenvalue of
must necessarily be larger than , which we always assume in what follows.
Combining these two constraints, we propose three different mathematical
programs that reflect these tradeoffs.

3.3.1 Minimizing Predictability
Minimizing Box–Tiao's predictability defined in Section 3.2.2, while ensuring
that both the variance of the resulting process exceeds and the vector of
loadings is sparse with a 0-norm equal to , means solving the following
program:

                                                                                P1




in the variable        with              , where            . Without the
normalization constraint           and the sparsity constraint         , problem
(P1) is equivalent to a generalized eigenvalue problem in the pair         . That
problem quickly becomes unstable when is ill-conditioned or is singular.
Adding the normalization constraint            solves these numerical problems.

3.3.2 Minimizing the Portmanteau Statistic
Using a similar formulation, we can also minimize the order portmanteau
statistic defined in Section 3.2.3 while ensuring a minimal variance level by
solving:

                                                                                  P2




in the variable        , for some parameter       . Problem (P2) has a natural
interpretation: the objective function directly minimizes the portmanteau
statistic, while the constraints normalize the norm of the basket weights to one,
impose a variance larger than , and impose a sparsity constraint on .

3.3.3 Minimizing the Crossing Statistic
Following the results in Section 3.2.4, maximizing the crossing rate while
keeping the rest of the autocorrelogram low,

                                                                                  P3




in the variable        , for some parameters       . This will produce processes
that are close to being AR(1) while having a high crossing rate.

3.4 Semidefinite Relaxations and Sparse
Components
Problems (P1), (P2), and (P3) are not convex and can be in practice extremely
difficult to solve, since they involve a sparse selection of variables. We detail in
this section convex relaxations to these problems that can be used to derive
relevant suboptimal solutions.

3.4.1 A Semidefinite Programming Approach to Basket
Estimation
We propose to relax problems (P1), (P2), and (P3) into semidefinite programs
(SDPs) (Vandenberghe and Boyd, 1996). We show that these SDPs can handle
naturally sparsity and volatility constraints while still aiming at mean reversion.
In some restricted cases, one can show that these relaxations are tight, in the
sense that they solve exactly the programs described above. In such cases, the
true solution    of some of the programs above can be recovered using their
corresponding SDP solution        .
However, in most of the cases we will be interested in, such a correspondence is
not guaranteed, and these SDP relaxations can only serve as a guide to propose
solutions to these hard nonconvex problems when considered with respect to
vector . To do so, the optimal solution        needs to be deflated from a large
rank        matrix to a rank one matrix      , where can be considered a good
candidate for basket weights. A typical approach to deflate a positive definite
matrix into a vector is to consider its eigenvector with the leading eigenvalue.
Having sparsity constraints in mind, we propose to apply a heuristic grounded on
sparse PCA (d'Aspremont et al., 2007; Zou et al., 2006). Instead of considering
the lead eigenvector, we recover the leading sparse eigenvector of       (with a 0-
norm constrained to be equal to ). Several efficient algorithmic approaches
have been proposed to solve approximately that problem; we use the SpaSM
(sparse statistiscal modeling) toolbox (Sjöstrand et al., 2012) in our experiments.

3.4.2 Predictability
We can form a convex relaxation of the predictability optimization problem (P1)
over the variable     ,

                                                                                3.10




by using the lifting argument of Lovász and Schrijver (1991), (i.e., writing
       ) to solve now the problem using a semidefinite variable , and by
introducing a sparsity-inducing regularizer on that considers the norm of
,




so that Problem (P1) becomes (here         ),
                                                                              3.11


We relax this last problem further by dropping the rank constraint, to get

                                                                             SDP1


                                                                              3.13
which is a convex semidefinite program in         .

3.4.3 Portmanteau
Using the same lifting argument and writing           , we can relax problem (P2)
by solving

                                                                             SDP2


                                                                              3.15
a semidefinite program in        .

3.4.4 Crossing Stats
As above, we can write a semidefinite relaxation for problem (P3):

                                                                             SDP3


                                                                              3.17
3.4.4.1 Tightness of the SDP Relaxation in the Absence of Sparsity
Constraints
Note that for the crossing stats criterion (with        and no quadratic term in ),
the original problem P3 and its relaxation SDP3 are equivalent, taking for
granted that no sparsity constraint is considered in the original problems and
is set to 0 in the relaxations. These relaxations boil down to an SDP that only has
a linear objective, a linear constraint, and a constraint on the trace of . In that
case, Brickman (1961) showed that the range of two quadratic forms over the
unit sphere is a convex set when the ambient dimension     , which means in
particular that for any two square matrices    of dimension ,




We refer the reader to Barvinok 2002 (§II.13) for a more complete discussion of
this result. As remarked in Cuturi and d'Aspremont (2013), the same equivalence
holds for P1 and SDP1. This means that, in the case where               and the 0-
norm of is not constrained, for any solution         of the relaxation (SDP1) there
exists a vector     that satisfies                 ,                   , and
                   , which means that      is an optimal solution of the original
problem (P1). Boyd and Vandenberghe (2004, App. B) show how to explicitly
extract such a solution      from a matrix     solving (SDP1). This result is,
however, mostly anecdotical in the context of this chapter, in which we look for
sparse and volatile baskets: using these two regularizers breaks the tightness
result between the original problems in       and their SDP counterparts.

3.5 Numerical Experiments
In this section, we evaluate the ability of our techniques to extract mean-
reverting baskets with sufficient variance and small 0-norm from a universe of
tradable assets. We measure performance by applying to these baskets a trading
strategy designed specifically for mean-reverting processes. We show that, under
realistic trading costs assumptions, selecting sparse and volatile mean-reverting
baskets translates into lower incurred costs and thus improves the performance
of trading strategies.

3.5.1 Historical Data
We consider daily time series of option implied volatilities for 210 stocks from
January 4, 2004, to December 30, 2010. A key advantage of using option
implied volatility data is that these numbers vary in a somewhat limited range.
Volatility also tends to exhibit regime switching, and hence can be considered
piecewise stationary, which helps in extracting structural relationships. We plot a
sample time series from this dataset in Figure 3.1 that corresponds to the implicit
volatility of Apple's stock. In what follows, we mean by asset the implied
volatility of any of these stocks whose value can be efficiently replicated using
option portfolios.




Figure 3.1 Option implied volatility for Apple between January 4, 2004, and
December 30, 2010.

3.5.2 Mean-reverting Basket Estimators
We compare the three basket selection techniques detailed here, predictability,
portmanteau, and crossing statistic, implemented with varying targets for both
sparsity and volatility, with two cointegration estimators that build upon PCA
(Maddala and Kim, 1998, §5.5.4).. By the label PCA, we mean in what follows
the eigenvector with the smallest eigenvalue of the covariance matrix      of the
process (Stock and Watson, 1988). By sPCA, we mean the sparse eigenvector of
   with 0-norm that has the smallest eigenvalue, which can be simply
estimated by computing the leading sparse eigenvector of            where is
bigger than the leading eigenvalue of . This sparse principal component of the
covariance matrix should not be confused with our utilization of sparse PCA
in Section 3.4.1 as a way to recover a vector solution from the solution of a
positive semidefinite problem. Note also that techniques based on principal
components do not take explicitly variance levels into account when estimating
the weights of a cointegrated relationship.

3.5.3 Jurek and Yang (2007) Trading Strategy
While option implied volatility is not directly tradable, it can be synthesized
using baskets of call options, and we assimilate it to a tradable asset
with(significant) transaction costs in what follows. For baskets of volatilities
isolated by the techniques listed above, we apply the Jurek and Yang (2007)
strategy for log utilities to the basket process recording out of sample
performance. Jurek and Yang proposed to trade a stationary autoregressive
process       of order 1 and mean governed by the equation                     ,
where          , by taking a position in the asset , which is proportional to

                                                                                   3.18

In effect, the strategy advocates taking a long (resp. short) position in the asset
whenever it is below (resp. above) its long-term mean, and adjust the position
size to account for the volatility of and its mean reversion speed . Given
basket weights , we apply standard AR estimation procedures on the in-sample
portion of       to recover estimates for and and plug them directly in
Equation (3.18). This approach is illustrated for two baskets in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2 Three sample trading experiments, using the PCA, sparse PCA, and
crossing statistics estimators. (a) Pool of 9 volatility time series selected using
our fast PCA selection procedure. (b) Basket weights estimated with in-sample
data using the eigenvector of the covariance matrix with the smallest eigenvalue,
the smallest eigenvector with a sparsity constraint of                     , and the
crossing statistics estimator with a volatility threshold of         , (i.e., a
constraint on the basket's variance to be larger than        the median variance of
all 8 assets). (c) Using these 3 procedures, the time series of the resulting basket
price in the in-sample part (c) and out-of-sample parts (d) are displayed. (e)
Using the Jurek and Yang (2007) trading strategy results in varying positions
(expressed as units of baskets) during the outsample testing phase. (f)
Transaction costs that result from trading the assets to achieve such positions
accumulate over time. (g) Taking both trading gains and transaction costs into
account, the net wealth of the investor for each strategy can be computed (the
Sharpe ratio over the test period is displayed in the legend). Note how both
sparsity and volatility constraints translate into portfolios composed of fewer
assets, but with a higher variance.

3.5.4 Transaction Costs
We assume that fixed transaction costs are negligible, but that transaction costs
per contract unit are incurred at each trading date. We vary the size of these costs
across experiments to show the robustness of the approaches tested here to
trading costs fluctuations. We let the transaction cost per contract unit vary
between 0.03 and 0.17 cents by increments of 0.02 cents. Since the average
value of a contract over our dataset is about 40 cents, this is akin to considering
trading costs ranging from about 7 to about 40 base points (BPs), that is, 0.07 to
0.4%.

3.5.5 Experimental Setup
We consider 20 sliding windows of one year (255 trading days) taken in the
history, and consider each of these windows independently. Each window is split
between 85% of days to estimate and 15% of days to test-trade our models,
resulting in 38 test-trading days. We do not recompute the weights of the baskets
during the test phase. The 210 stock volatilities (assets) we consider are grouped
into 13 subgroups, depending on the economic sector of their stock. This results
in 13 sector pools whose size varies between 3 assets and 43 assets. We look for
mean-reverting baskets in each of these 13 sector pools.
Because all combinations of stocks in each of the 13 sector pools may not
necessarily be mean-reverting, we select smaller candidate pools of assets
through a greedy backward-forward minimization scheme, where                   . To
do so, we start with an exhaustive search of all pools of size 3 within the sector
pool, and proceed by adding or removing an asset using the PCA estimator (the
smallest eigenvalue of the covariance matrix of a set of assets). We use the PCA
estimator in that backward-forward search because it is the fastest to compute.
We score each pool using that PCA statistic, the smaller meaning the better. We
generate up to 200 candidate pools per each of the 13 sector pools. Out of all
these candidate pools, we keep the best 50 in each window, and then use our
cointegration estimation approaches separately on these candidates. One such
pool was, for instance, composed of the stocks
{BBY,COST,DIS,GCI,MCD,VOD,VZ,WAG,T} observed during the year 2006. Figure
3.2 provides a closeup on that universe of stocks, and shows the results of three
trading experiments using PCA, sparse PCA, or the Crossing Stats estimator to
build trading strategies.

3.5.6 Results
3.5.6.1 Robustness of Sharpe Ratios to Costs
In Figure 3.3, we plot the average of the Sharpe ratio over the 922 baskets
estimated in our experimental set versus transaction costs. We consider different
PCA settings as well as our three estimators using, in all three cases, the variance
bound to be 0.3 times the median of all variances of assets available in a given
asset pool, and the 0-norm to be equal to 0.3 times the size of the universe (itself
between 8 and 12). We observe that Sharpe ratios decrease the fastest for the
naive PCA-based method, this decrease being somewhat mitigated when adding
a constraint on the 0-norm of the basket weights obtained with sparse PCA. Our
methods require, in addition to sparsity, enough volatily to secure sufficient
gains. These empirical observations agree with the intuition of this chapter:
simple cointegration techniques can produce synthetic baskets with high mean
reversion, large support, and low variance. Trading a portfolio with low variance
that is supported by multiple assets translates in practice into high trading costs,
which can damage the overall performance of the strategy. Both sparse PCA and
our techniques manage instead to achieve a tradeoff between desirable mean
reversion properties and, at the same time, control for sufficient variance and
small basket size to allow for lower overall transaction costs.
Figure 3.3 Average Sharpe ratio for the Jurek and Yang (2007) trading strategy
captured over about 922 trading episodes, using different basket estimation
approaches. These 922 trading episodes were obtained by considering 7 disjoint
time-windows in our market sample, each of a length of about one year. Each
time-window was divided into 85% in-sample data to estimate baskets, and 15%
outsample to test strategies. On each time-window, the set of 210 tradable assets
during that period was clustered using sectorial information, and each cluster
screened (in the in-sample part of the time-window) to look for the most
promising baskets of size between 8 and 12 in terms of mean reversion, by
choosing greedily subsets of stocks that exhibited the smallest minimal
eigenvalues in their covariance matrices. For each trading episode, the same
universe of stocks was fed to different mean-reversion algorithms. Because
volatility time-series are bounded and quite stationary, we consider the PCA
approach, which uses the eigenvector with the smallest eigenvalue of the
covariance matrix of the time-series to define a cointegrated relationship.
Besides standard PCA, we have also consider sparse PCA eigenvectors with
minimal eigenvalue, with the size of the support of the eigenvector (the size of
the resulting basket) constrained to be 30%, 50% or 70% of the total number of
considered assets. We consider also the portmanteau, predictability and crossing
stats estimation techniques with variance thresholds of          and a support
whose size (the number of assets effectively traded) is targeted to be about
      of the size of the considered universe (itself between 8 and 12). As can be
seen in the figure, the sharpe ratios of all trading approaches decrease with an
increase in transaction costs. One expects sparse baskets to perform better under
the assumption that costs are high, and this is indeed observed here. Because the
relationship between sharpe ratios and transaction costs can be efficiently
summarized as being a linear one, we propose in the plots displayed in Figure
3.4 a way to summarize the lines above with two numbers each: their intercept
(Sharpe level in the quasi-absence of costs) and slope (degradation of Sharpe as
costs increase). This visualization is useful to observe how sparsity (basket size)
and volatility thresholds influence the robustness to costs of the strategies we
propose. This visualization allows us to observe how performance is influenced
by these parameter settings.

3.5.6.2 Tradeoffs between Mean Reversion, Sparsity, and Volatility
In the plots of Figure 3.4, this analysis is further detailed by considering various
settings for (volatility threshold) and . To improve the legibility of these
results, we summarize, following the observation in Figure 3.3 that the
relationship between Sharpes and transactions costs seems almost linear, each of
these curves by two numbers: an intercept level (Sharpe ratio when costs are
low) and a slope (degradation of Sharpe as costs increase). Using these two
numbers, we locate all considered strategies in the intercept–slope plane. We
first show the spectral techniques, PCA and sPCA, with different levels of
sparsity, meaning that is set to           , where                   and is the size
of the original basket. Each of the three estimators we propose is studied in a
separate plot. For each, we present various results characterized by two numbers:
a volatility threshold                            and a sparsity level
                 . To avoid cumbersome labels, we attach an arrow to each point:
the arrow's length in the vertical direction is equal to and characterizes the size
of the basket, and the horizontal length is equal to and characterizes the
volatility level. As can be seen in these three plots, an interesting interplay
between these two factors allows for a continuum of strategies that trade mean
reversion (and thus Sharpe levels) for robustness to cost level.
Figure 3.4 Relationships between Sharpe in a low cost setting (intercept) in the
  -axis and robustness of Sharpe to costs (slope of Sharpe/costs curve) of a
different estimators implemented with varying volatility levels and sparsity
levels parameterized as a multiple of the universe size. Each colored square in
the figures above corresponds to the performance of a given estimator
(Portmanteau in subfigure , Predictability in subfigure       and Crossing
Statistics in subfigure ) using different parameters for
                          and                 . The parameters used for each
experiment are displayed using an arrow whose vertical length is proportional to
   and horizontal length is proportional to .

3.6 Conclusion
We have described three different criteria to quantify the amount of mean
reversion in a time series. For each of these criteria, we have detailed a tractable
algorithm to isolate a vector of weights that has optimal mean reversion, while
constraining both the variance (or signal strength) of the resulting univariate
series to be above a certain level and its 0-norm to be at a certain level. We show
that these bounds on variance and support size, together with our new criteria for
mean reversion, can significantly improve the performance of mean reversion
statistical arbitrage strategies and provide useful controls to adjust mean-
reverting strategies to varying trading conditions, notably liquidity risk and cost
environment.
References
Barvinok, A. (2002). A course in convexity. Providence, RI: American
Mathematical Society.
Bewley, R., Orden, D., Yang, M. and Fisher, L. (1994). Comparison of Box-
Tiao and Johansen canonical estimators of cointegrating vectors in VEC (1).
Models. Journal of Econometrics, 64, 3–27.
Box, G. and Tiao, G. (1977). A canonical analysis of multiple time series.
Biometrika, 64(2), 355–365.
Boyd, S. and Vandenberghe, L. (2004). Convex optimization. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Brickman, L. (1961). On the field of values of a matrix. Proceedings of the
American Mathematical Society, 12, 61–66.
Cuturi, M. and d'Aspremont, A. (2013). Mean reversion with a variance
threshold. In Proceedings of the International Conference in Machine Learning
2013, June, Atlanta, GA.
d'Aspremont, A. (2011). Identifying small mean reverting portfolios.
Quantitative Finance, 11(3), 351–364.
d'Aspremont, A., El Ghaoui, L., Jordan, M.I. and Lanckriet, G.R. (2007). A
direct formulation for sparse PCA using semidefinite programming. SIAM
Review, 49(3), 434–448.
Elie, R., and Espinosa, G.E. (2011). Optimal stopping of a mean reverting
diffusion: minimizing the relative distance to the maximum. hal-00573429.
Engle, R.F. and Granger, C.W.J. (1987). Cointegration and error correction:
Representation, estimation, and testing. Econometrica, 55(2), 251–276.
Hamilton, J. (1994). Time series analysis, Vol. 2. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Johansen, S. (1991). Estimation and hypothesis testing of cointegration vectors
in Gaussian vector autoregressive models. Econometrica, 59(6), 1551–1580.
Johansen, S. (2004). Cointegration: overview and development. In Handbook of
financial time series (ed. Andersen, T.G., Davis, R.A., Kreiß, J.P. and Mikosch,
T.V.). Berlin: Springer.
Johansen, S. (2005). Cointegration: a survey. Palgrave Handbook of
Econometrics. London: Palgrave.
Jurek, J.W. and Yang, H. (2007). Dynamic portfolio selection in arbitrage. EFA
2006 Meetings Paper. SSRN eLibrary, http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.882536
Kedem, B. and Yakowitz, S. (1994). Time series analysis by higher order
crossings. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Press.
Liu, J. and Timmermann, A. (2010). Optimal arbitrage strategies. Technical
report. San Diego: University of California, San Diego.
Ljung, G. and Box, G. (1978). On a measure of lack of fit in time series models.
Biometrika, 65(2), 297–303.
Lovász, L. and Schrijver, A. (1991). Cones of matrices and set-functions and 0-1
optimization. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 1(2), 166–190.
Lütkepohl, H. (2005). New introduction to multiple time series analysis. Berlin:
Springer.
Maddala, G. and Kim, I. (1998). Unit roots, cointegration, and structural
change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sjöstrand, K., Clemmensen, L.H., Larsen, R. and Ersbøll, B. (2012). SpaSM: A
MATLAB toolbox for sparse statistical modeling. Journal of Statistical
Software, accepted.
Stock, J. and Watson, M. (1988). Testing for common trends. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 83, 1097–1107.
Tsay, R.S. (2005). Analysis of financial time series. Weinheim: Wiley-
Interscience.
Vandenberghe, L. and Boyd, S. (1996). Semidefinite programming. SIAM
Review, 38(1), 49–95.
Ylvisaker, N.D. (1965). The expected number of zeros of a stationary Gaussian
process. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 36(3), 1043–1046.
Zou, H., Hastie, T. and Tibshirani, R. (2006). Sparse principal component
analysis. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 15(2), 265–286.
Chapter 4
Temporal Causal Modeling
   Prabhanjan Kambadur1, Aurélie C. Lozano2 and Ronny Luss2
   1Bloomberg LP, USA
   2IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, USA



4.1 Introduction
Discovering causal relationships in multivariate time series data has many
important applications in finance. Consider portfolio management, where one of
the key tasks is to quantify the risk associated with different portfolios of assets.
Traditionally, correlations amongst assets have been used to manage risk in
portfolios. Knowledge of causal structures amongst assets can help improve
portfolio management as knowing causality – rather than just correlation – can
allow portfolio managers to mitigate risks directly. For example, suppose that an
index fund “A” is found to be one of the causal drivers of another index fund
“B.” Then, the variance of B can be reduced by offsetting the variation due to
the causal effects of A. In contrast simply knowing that “A” is correlated with
“B” provides no guidance on how to act on index “B,” as this does not mean that
the two indexes are connected by a cause-and-effect relationship; hedging solely
based on correlation does not protect against the possibility that correlation is
driven by an unknown effect. Moreover, causal structures may be more stable
across market regimes as they have more chance to capture effective economic
relationships.
In order to mitigate risks effectively, we need several enhancements to mere
causality detection. First, we need to be able to reason about the “strength” of the
causal relationship between two assets using statistical measures such as p-
values. Attaching well-founded strengths to causal relationships allows us to
focus on the important relationships and serves as a guard against false discovery
of causal relationships. Second, we need to be able to infer causality in the
presence of heteroscedasticity. Typically, causal relationships are modeled by
regressing to the conditional mean; this does not always give us a complete
understanding of the conditional distributions of the responses based on their
causalities. Finally, as the causality amongst assets might be seasonal, we need
to be able to automatically identify regime changes. If we can successfully
discover a temporally accurate causal structure that encodes causal strengths, we
would be able to enhance the accuracy of tasks such as explaining the effect of
political or financial events on different markets and understanding the
microstructure of a financial network.
In this chapter, we discuss temporal causal modeling (or TCM) (Lozano et al.,
2009a,b), an approach that generalizes the notion of Granger causality to
multivariate time series by linking the causality inference process to the
estimation of sparse vector autoregressive (VAR) models (Section 4.2). Granger
causality (Granger, 1980) is an operational definition of causality well known in
econometrics, where a source time series is said to “cause” a target time series if
it contains additional information for predicting the future values of the target
series, beyond the information contained in the past values of the target time
series. In essence, TCM combines Granger causality with sparse multivariate
regression algorithms, and performs graphical modeling over the lagged
temporal variables. We define and use a notion of causal strength modeling (or
CSM) for TCM to investigate these potential implications (Section 4.3). We
describe how TCM can be extended to the quantile loss function (or Q-TCM) to
better model heteroscedactic data (Section 4.4). Finally, we extend TCM to
identify regime changes by combining it with a Markov switching modeling
framework (Chib, 1998); specifically, we describe a Bayesian Markov switching
model for estimating sparse dynamic Bayesian networks (or MS-SDBN)
(Section 4.5).
As a concrete case study that highlights the benefits of TCM, consider a
financial network of various exchange-traded funds (ETFs) that represent indices
tracking a mix of stocks traded on the largest exchanges of various countries. For
example, the ticker symbol EWJ represents an ETF that tracks the MSCI Japan
Index. We consider a dataset from a family of ETFs called iShares that contains
ETF time series of 15 countries as well as an index tracking oil and gas prices
and an index tracking the spot price of gold; iShares are managed by Blackrock
and the data are publicly available from finance.yahoo.com. The causal CSM
graphs formed during four different 750-day periods that cover 2005–2008 are
shown in Figure 4.1; for interpretability, we use a lag spanning the previous 5
days for vector autoregression. Each feature is a monthly return computed over
the previous 22 business days and the lag of 5 days is the monthly return ending
on each of those 5 days. Each graph moves the window of data over 50 business
days in order to view how time affects the causal networks. Each arc appearing
in the CSM causal graphs represents a causal relationship with causal strength
greater than a predefined threshold in      . Causal strength, as we define it,
measures the likelihood that the causal relationship between two nodes is
statistically significant. For example, in Figure 4.1a, the causal strength of the
relationship directed from South Korea to the United States measures the
likelihood that including the South Korea data increases the performance of a
United States model. This likelihood is further defined in Section 4.3 (note that
this definition of causal strength differs from heuristic notions of causal strength,
such as measuring coefficient magnitudes in a linear model). In particular, we
are interested in the dependencies of the United States – represented by an ETF
that tracks the S&P 500 – during the financial crisis of 2007 and 2008. The
panels in Figure 4.1 show an interesting dependence of US-listed equities on
Asian-listed equities, which focuses mostly on Japan. To analyze this further, we
perform TCM to discover the United States' dependencies over several time
periods beginning in 2005 and running through 2015. Table 4.1, which shows
the results of our analysis, depicts the causal strength values for the three
strongest relationships for each time period. From Table 4.1, we see that causal
relationships change very quickly with time (periods are shifted by 50 business
days, resulting in rapid changes to the causal networks). For example, we see
that Asian dependencies almost always play a major role for the United States,
but the specific Asian countries of interest change. In the early ongoing period of
the financial crisis, Japan, South Korea, and China all played major roles, but
after the brunt of the crisis occurred (2009 and onwards), South Korea and
Germany had the biggest influences. In 2012, Japan and China superseded South
Korea as the major dependencies, and 2 years later, Hong Kong played the
bigger role. We also note from this analysis that, in 2012, Switzerland overtook
Germany as the main European factor for US-listed equities.
Figure 4.1 Causal CSM graphs of ETFs from iShares formed during four
different 750-day periods in 2007–2008. Each graph moves the window of data
over 50 business days in order to discover the effect of time on the causal
networks. The lag used for VAR spans the 5 days (i.e., uses five features)
preceding the target day. Each feature is a monthly return computed over the
previous 22 business days.
Table 4.1 Results of TCM modeling on an ETF that tracks the S&P 500 between
2005 and 2015 that depicts the causal strength values for the three strongest
relationships are given for each time period
Time period        Factor 1    Factor 2        Factor 3        Factor 4
03-Feb-2005 to     South Korea Mexico          Australia       Gold & Silver
03-Feb-2005 to     South Korea   Mexico        Australia     Gold & Silver
29-Jan-2008        (0.9994)      (0.9264)      (0.9216)      (0.0136)
18-Apr-2005 to     Japan (1)     South Korea   China (0.968) Gold & Silver
10-Apr-2008                      (1)                         (0.0162)
28-Jun-2005 to 20- Brazil (1)    Japan         Canada        Gold & Silver
Jun-2008                         (0.9998)      (0.9994)      (0.0248)
08-Sep-2005 to     Brazil (1)    Japan         China (0.982) Gold & Silver
02-Sep-2008                      (0.9998)                    (0.0486)
17-Nov-2005 to     China         Switzerland   South Korea Gold & Silver
11-Nov-2008        (0.9996)      (0.993)       (0.987)       (0.3646)
01-Feb-2006 to     South Korea   Netherlands   Oil & Gas     Gold & Silver
26-Jan-2009        (0.987)       (0.973)       (0.8532)      (0.5068)
13-Apr-2006 to     Netherlands   South Korea   Oil & Gas     Gold & Silver
07-Apr-2009        (0.9998)      (0.9958)      (0.8332)      (0.5622)
26-Jun-2006 to 18- South Korea   Netherlands   Oil & Gas     Gold & Silver
Jun-2009           (0.998)       (0.9878)      (0.8874)      (0.6324)
06-Sep-2006 to     South Korea   Germany       Oil & Gas     Gold & Silver
28-Aug-2009        (0.979)       (0.9704)      (0.8208)      (0.6126)
15-Nov-2006 to     South Korea   Germany       Oil & Gas     Gold & Silver
09-Nov-2009        (0.981)       (0.9734)      (0.8078)      (0.676)
31-Jan-2007 to 22- South Korea   Germany       Oil & Gas     Gold & Silver
Jan-2010           (0.986)       (0.9774)      (0.7702)      (0.6364)
13-Apr-2007 to     South Korea   Germany       Gold & Silver Oil & Gas
06-Apr-2010        (0.9962)      (0.9792)      (0.7118)      (0.625)
25-Jun-2007 to 16- South Korea   Germany       Oil & Gas     Gold & Silver
Jun-2010           (0.9922)      (0.934)       (0.762)       (0.666)
05-Sep-2007 to     South Korea   Germany       Oil & Gas     Gold & Silver
26-Aug-2010        (0.9828)      (0.9524)      (0.8022)      (0.7132)
14-Nov-2007 to     South Korea   Germany       Oil & Gas     Gold & Silver
05-Nov-2010        (0.9736)      (0.9424)      (0.7744)      (0.745)
29-Jan-2008 to 19- Germany       South Korea   Oil & Gas     Gold & Silver
Jan-2011           (0.9868)      (0.9718)      (0.898)       (0.779)
10-Apr-2008 to     Germany       South Korea   Oil & Gas     Gold & Silver
31-Mar-2011        (0.953)       (0.9308)      (0.9082)      (0.7752)
20-Jun-2008 to 13- Germany       Oil & Gas     South Korea Gold & Silver
20-Jun-2008 to 13- Germany       Oil & Gas     South Korea   Gold & Silver
Jun-2011           (0.9674)      (0.9208)      (0.909)       (0.8036)
02-Sep-2008 to     Germany       Oil & Gas     South Korea   Gold & Silver
23-Aug-2011        (0.9924)      (0.9758)      (0.9178)      (0.6388)
11-Nov-2008 to     Brazil        Switzerland   South Korea   Gold & Silver
02-Nov-2011        (0.9382)      (0.8766)      (0.7974)      (0.4654)
26-Jan-2009 to 17- Japan         Switzerland   South Korea   Gold & Silver
Jan-2012           (0.9996)      (0.797)       (0.6104)      (0.3424)
07-Apr-2009 to     Japan (1)     China (0.99) Switzerland   Gold & Silver
28-Mar-2012                                   (0.6638)      (0.3712)
18-Jun-2009 to 08- Japan (1)     China        Switzerland   Gold & Silver
Jun-2012                         (0.9902)     (0.749)       (0.7332)
28-Aug-2009 to     Japan (1)     China        Switzerland   Gold & Silver
20-Aug-2012                      (0.9662)     (0.8934)      (0.6304)
09-Nov-2009 to     Japan (1)     Switzerland China          Gold & Silver
01-Nov-2012                      (0.9404)     (0.9386)      (0.5754)
22-Jan-2010 to 15- Japan (1)     Switzerland China          Gold & Silver
Jan-2013                         (0.9576)     (0.8048)      (0.4698)
06-Apr-2010 to     Japan         Switzerland China          Gold & Silver
28-Mar-2013        (0.9998)      (0.9552)     (0.8902)      (0.244)
16-Jun-2010 to 10- Switzerland   Japan        China         Gold & Silver
Jun-2013           (0.9996)      (0.9996)     (0.7656)      (0.3372)
26-Aug-2010 to     Switzerland   Brazil       China (0.621) Gold & Silver
20-Aug-2013        (0.9966)      (0.9872)                   (0.4168)
05-Nov-2010 to     Switzerland   Brazil       Hong Kong     Gold & Silver
30-Oct-2013        (1)           (0.9964)     (0.9558)      (0.185)
19-Jan-2011 to 13- Switzerland   Hong Kong Brazil           Gold & Silver
Jan-2014           (1)           (0.976)      (0.9572)      (0.1658)
31-Mar-2011 to     Switzerland   Brazil       Hong Kong     Gold & Silver
26-Mar-2014        (1)           (0.996)      (0.946)       (0.2392)
13-Jun-2011 to 06- Switzerland   Hong Kong Brazil           Gold & Silver
Jun-2014           (1)           (0.9946)     (0.9668)      (0.185)
23-Aug-2011 to     Hong Kong     Taiwan       Switzerland   Gold & Silver
18-Aug-2014        (0.9604)      (0.9598)     (0.9564)      (0.3786)
02-Nov-2011 to     Switzerland   Brazil       Gold & Silver Taiwan
02-Nov-2011 to       Switzerland    Brazil          Gold & Silver Taiwan
28-Oct-2014          (1)            (0.907)         (0.787)       (0.7262)


4.2 TCM
In this section, we exposit the basic methodology of TCM. In Section 4.1, we
introduce Granger causality, which forms the underpinning for TCM. In Section
4.2, we expand the notion of Granger causality to grouping, which allows us to
determine causality of an entire time series on other time series. Finally, in
Section 4.3, we present experiments on synthetic datasets with known ground
truths for the basic TCM methods.

4.2.1 Granger Causality and Temporal Causal Modeling
Granger causality (Granger, 1980), which was introduced by the Nobel prize–
winning economist Clive Granger, has proven useful as an operational notion of
causality in time-series analysis in the area of econometrics. Granger causality is
based on the simple intuition that a cause should precede its effect; in particular,
if a “source” time-series causally affects another “target” time-series, then the
past values of the source should be helpful in predicting the future values of the
target, beyond what can be predicted based only on the target's own past values.
That is, a time-series “Granger causes” another time series , if the accuracy
of regressing for in terms of past values of and is (statistically)
significantly better than that of regressing just with past values of . Let
denote the time-series variables for and            the same for ; then, to
determine Granger causality, we first perform the following two regressions:

                                                                                 4.1


                                                                                 4.2


where is the maximum “lag” allowed in past observations. To determine
whether or not (4.1) is more accurate than (4.2) with a statistically significantly
advantage, we perform an F-test or another suitable statistical test. We shall use
the term feature to mean a time-series (e.g., ) and use temporal variables or
lagged variables to refer to the individual values (e.g., ).
The notion of Granger causality, as introduced above, was defined for a pair of
time-series; however, we typically want to determine causal relationships
amongst several time-series. Naturally, we use graphical modeling over time-
series data to determine conditional dependencies between the temporal
variables, and obtain insight and constraints on the causal relationship between
the time-series. One technique for graphical modeling is to use regression
algorithms with variable selection to determine the causal relationships of each
variable; for example, lasso (Tibshirani, 1996), which minimizes the sum of
squared errors loss plus a sparsity-inducing       norm penalty on the regression
coefficients. That is, we can consider the variable selection process in regression
for in terms of        ,     ,     and so on, as an application of the Granger test
on time-series against the time-series , , , .1 When a pairwise Granger
test is extended to facilitate multiple causal time-series, we can say that
Granger causes , if         is selected for any time lag               in the above
variable selection. If such regression-based variable selection coincides with the
conditional dependence between the variables, the above operational definition
can be interpreted as the key building block of the temporal causal model.

4.2.2 Grouped Temporal Causal Modeling Method
In TCM, we are typically interested in knowing whether an entire time-series
    ,      , ,       provides information to help predict another time-series ; it
is of little or no consequence if an individual lag ,      provides additional
information for predicting . From a modeling perspective, the relevant variable
selection question is not whether an individual lagged variable is to be included
in regression, but whether the lagged variables for a given time-series as a group
are to be included. This would allow us to make statements of the form “
Granger causes .” Therefore, a more faithful implementation of TCM methods
should take into account the group structure imposed by the time-series into the
modeling approach and fitting criteria that are used in the variable selection
process. This is the motivation for us to turn to the recently developed
methodology, group lasso (Yuan and Lin, 2006), which performs variable
selection with respect to model-fitting criteria that penalize intragroup and
intergroup variable inclusion differently. This argument leads to the generic
procedure of the grouped graphical Granger modeling method that is shown in
Figure 4.2. We now describe both regularized and greedy regression methods
that can serve as        in Figure 4.2. Under regularized methods, we describe
with both nongrouped and grouped variable selection techniques: lasso, adaptive
lasso, and group lasso. Of these three, we prefer group lasso for the
subprocedure          in Figure 4.2 as it performs regression with group variable
selection. Lasso and adaptive lasso are not grouped methods and will be used for
comparison purposes in the simulations of Section 4.2.3.
   1. Input
        Time-series data           where each     is a -dimensional vector.
        A regression method with group variable selection, REG.
   2.
    Initialization
    Initialize the adjacency matrix for the features, that is,           , where
       is the set of features (e.g., by all 0's).
   3.
    Selection
    For each feature        , run REG on regressing for     in terms of the past
    lagged variables,             , for all the features     (including ). That
    is, regress                    in terms of




   where                     . For each feature      , place an edge       into
    , if and only if    was selected as a group by the grouped variable selection
   method REG.
Figure 4.2 Generic TCM algorithm.

Regularized Least-Squares Methods
Let                       be a response vector and let                          be
the predictor matrix, where                   ,         , are the covariates.
Typically the pairs         are assumed to be independently identically
distributed (i.i.d.) but most results can be generalized to stationary processes
given a reasonable decay rate of dependencies such as conditions on the mixing
rates. As we are interested in selecting the most important predictors in a high-
dimensional setting, the ordinary-least-squares (OLS) estimate is not
satisfactory; instead, procedures performing coefficient shrinkage and variable
selection are desirable. A popular method for variable selection is the lasso
(Tibshirani, 1996), which is defined as:



where λ is a penalty parameter. Here the norm penalty             automatically
introduces variable selection, that is          for some , leading to improved
accuracy and interpretability. The lasso procedure – with lag          – has been
used for causality analysis in Fujita et al. (2007). Unfortunately, lasso tends to
overselect the variables and to address this issue, Zou (2006) proposed the
adaptive lasso, a two-stage procedure solving:




where       is an initial root- consistent estimator such as that obtained by OLS
or Ridge Regression. Notice that if            then       ,            . In addition
if the penalization parameter is chosen appropriately, adaptive lasso is
consistent for variable selection, and enjoys the “Oracle Property”, which
(broadly) signifies that the procedure performs as well as if the true subset of
relevant variables were known. Our final regression method – group lasso (Yuan
and Lin, 2006; Zhao et al., 2006) – shines in situations where natural groupings
exist between variables, and variables belonging to the same group should be
either selected or eliminated as a whole. Given groups of variables that
partition the set of predictors, the group lasso estimate of Yuan and Lin (2006)
solves:




where                   and    denotes the set of group indices. Notice that the
penalty term              in the above equation corresponds to the sparsity-
inducing norm applied to the groups of variables, where the norm is
used as the intragroup penalty. In TCM, groups are of equal length as they
correspond to the maximum lag that we wish to consider, so the objective does
not need to account for unequal group size. By electing to use the norm as the
intragroup penalty, group lasso encourages the coefficients for variables within a
given group to be similar in amplitude (as opposed to using the norm, for
example). Note that Granger causality always includes previous values of in
the model for ; we omit this in the above equation as we assume that the effect
of the previous values of has “removed” from . This is done as there is no
means to force into the model for using group-lasso.

Greedy Methods
In lieu of regularized least-squares methods, we could use greedy methods such
as the orthogonal patching pursuit algorithm (Lozano et al., 2009d) (or OMP)
and its variant for group variable selection, group OMP (Lozano et al., 2009d).
These procedures are iterative and pick the best feature (or feature group) in
each iteration, with respect to reduction of the residual error, and then re-
estimate the coefficients,     , via OLS on the restricted sets of selected features
(or feature groups). The group OMP procedure is described in Figure 4.3; the
classical OMP version can be recovered from Figure 4.3 by considering groups
of individual features. Note that – to strictly satisfy the definition of Granger
causality – we can forcibly select as one of the selected predictors of by
initializing           in Figure 4.3.
                                             [
   1. Input
       The data matrix                           ,
       Group structure               ,
       The response          .
       Precision        for the stopping criterion.
   2. Output
       The selected groups       .
       The regression coefficients       .
   3. Initialization
                ,       .
   4. Selection For
       1. Let                    .
       2. Let                                        . That is,   is the group that
       minimizes the residual for the target     .                    .
       3. If                           break,
      4. Set                  ;            .
   End
Figure 4.3 Method group OMP.

4.2.3 Synthetic Experiments
We conducted systematic experimentation using synthetic data in order to test
the performance of group lasso and group OMP against that of the nongroup
variants (lasso and adaptive lasso) for TCM. We present our findings in this
section.

Data Synthesis
As models for data generation, we employed the vector autoregression (VAR)
models (Enders, 2003). Specifically, let denote the vector of all feature values
at time , then a VAR model is defined as                                 , where s
are coefficient matrices over the features. We randomly generate an adjacency
matrix over the features that determines the structure of the true VAR model,
and then randomly assign the coefficients – – to each edge in the graph. We
use the model thus generated on a random initial vector to generate time-
series data               of a specified length . Following Arnold et al. (2007),
during data generation, we made use of the following parameters: (1) affinity,
which is the probability that each edge is included in the graph, was set at 0.2;
and (2) sample size per feature per lag, which is the total data size per feature
per maximum lag allowed, was set at 10. We sampled the coefficients of the
VAR model according to a normal distribution with mean 0 and standard
deviation 0.25. The noise standard deviation was set at 0.1, and so was the
standard deviation of the initial distribution.

Evaluation
For all the variable selection subprocedures, the penalty parameter is tuned so
as to minimize the BIC criterion (as recommended in Zou et al. (2006)), with
degrees of freedom estimated as in Zou et al. (2006) for lasso and adaptive lasso,
and as in Yuan and Lin (2006) for group lasso. Following Arnold et al. (2007),
we evaluate the performance of all methods using the measure, viewing the
causal modeling problem as that of predicting the inclusion of the edges in the
true graph, or the corresponding adjacency matrix. Briefly, given precision
and recall , the -measure is defined as             , and hence strikes a balance
in the trade-off between the two measures.

Results
Table 4.2 summarizes the results of our experiments, which reports the average
   values over 18 runs along with the standard error. These results clearly
indicate that there is a significant gap in performance between group lasso and
the nongroup counterparts (lasso and adaptive lasso). Figure 4.4 shows some
typical output graphs along with the true graph. In this particular instance, it is
rather striking how the nongroup methods tend to overselect, whereas the
grouped method manages to obtain a perfect graph.
Table 4.2 The accuracy ( ) and standard error in identifying the correct model
of the two nongrouped TCM methods, compared to those of the grouped TCM
methods on synthetic data
            Method            lasso     adalasso   grplasso grpOMP
            Accuracy ( )




Figure 4.4 Output causal structures on one synthetic dataset by the various
methods. In this example, the group-based method exactly reconstructs the
correct graph, while the nongroup ones fail badly.
Our experiments demonstrate the advantage of using the proposed TCM method
(using group lasso and group OMP) over the standard (nongrouped) methods
(based on lasso or adaptive lasso). Note that the nongrouped method based on
lasso can be considered as an extension of the algorithm proposed in Fujita et al.
(2007) to lags greater than one time unit.
Remark 4.1
In the remainder of this chapter, we present various extensions of TCM, where
we alternatively employ group OMP, group lasso, and Bayesian variants to serve
as REG in Figure 4.2. We do so in order to expose the reader to the variety of
group variable selection approaches. In general, the TCM extensions presented
here can be extended to use any of the group OMP, group lasso, or Bayesian
variants interchangeably.

4.3 Causal Strength Modeling
In Section 4.2, we discussed modeling of causal relationships using Granger
causality. In particular, in Figure 4.3, we discussed group OMP, a greedy
mechanism to compute the causal graph. As causal relationships are defined by
multiple lags of each time series, the next logical statistic to consider is the
strength of a group, where a group of variables is defined by the different lags of
the same time series. In the iShares example discussed in Section 4.1, the causal
graphs made use of a notion called causal strength modeling (or CSM). To
recap, the causal graphs in Figure 4.1 maintain only those relationships where
the causal strength is greater than a given threshold. In this section, we define the
notion of causal strength for each causal relationship discovered when applying
the group OMP method to TCM.2 The focus here is to determine the likelihood
that a selected group of features is a true predictor for the model.

Method
Group OMP (see Figure 4.3) is a greedy feature selection procedure that
produces, at each iteration, a new linear model that is fit using least-squares
regression. Causal strength is a concept that tells information about the
significance of a causal relationship. There are various ways to describe this
relationship; a simple heuristic, for example, would be to measure coefficient
magnitudes. In this framework, we measure causal strength as the likelihood that
the coefficients for a group    in the linear model are nonzero. This likelihood is
estimated by testing the probability of the null hypothesis              for all
coefficient indices in group . In general, the distribution of the coefficients of
a group of variables can be shown to be Gaussian (assuming Gaussian noise),
and the null hypothesis can be tested using an F-test. However, as group OMP
selects group in a greedy fashion, the distribution of the coefficients of a
group of variables is only conditionally Gaussian and the F-test offers
conservative estimates for p-values, which leads to incorrectly declaring certain
relationships as causal. To estimate the p-values accurately, we use Monte Carlo
simulation. Loftus and Taylor (2014) analyze the conditional Gaussian
distribution of the coefficients that group OMP (which they refer to as forward
stepwise model selection) discovers at each iteration and discuss how to
compute what they term the truncated test statistic. This statistic has a uniform
distribution and leads to unbiased p-values for the corresponding hypothesis
tests.3
The proxy for testing whether the coefficients of a group added at iteration are
zero tests the statistic                 as a proxy for        , where    is the set
of remaining groups that can be selected and includes the group selected at
iteration , and          is the normalized residual            . We want to test
whether the normalized residual           is noise or contains information. At each
iteration, the probability that the null hypothesis holds is estimated by Monte
Carlo simulation. First, random vectors are generated in order to create an
empirical distribution of               where has a standard normal distribution.
This represents the distribution of the above statistic that would be observed if
the normalized residual were Gaussian. Then, the probability that the null
hypothesis should be rejected can be computed from the quantiles of this
empirical distribution. Refer to Loftus and Taylor (2014) for further discussion
of this Monte Carlo estimation as well as their novel test statistic for testing the
null hypothesis. Note that our values of causal strength are defined as
where is the p-value corresponding to the null hypothesis.

4.4 Quantile TCM (Q-TCM)
The causal models discussed in Section 4.2 consider the causal relationship of
the conditional mean of the responses given predictors; yet in many relevant
applications, interest lies in the causal relationships for certain quantiles. These
relationships may differ from those for the conditional mean or might be more or
less pronounced. Therefore, it is critical to develop a complete understanding of
the conditional distributions of the responses based on their predictors. In
addition, real-world time-series often deviate from the Gaussian distribution,
while quantile estimation obtained via the distribution function of the conditional
mean regression models is very sensitive to these distributional assumptions.
However, quantile regression does not rely on a specific distributional
assumption on the data and provides more robust quantile estimation, and is thus
more applicable to real-world data. In view of the above desiderata, we present
in this section a quantile TCM approach, which extends the traditional VAR
model to estimate quantiles, and promotes sparsity by penalizing the VAR
coefficients (Aravkin et al., 2014). In particular, we extend the group OMP
algorithm in Figure 4.3 by replacing the ordinary-least-squares solution for     at
each iteration with the solution to quantile regression. Section 4.4.1 details the
new algorithm for quantile TCM, and Section 4.4.2 uses quantile TCM to
perform feature selection on the example from Section 4.1 with additional
outliers.

4.4.1 Modifying Group OMP for Quantile Loss
Overview
Figure 4.3 details the group OMP algorithm for norm loss function. We
modify two steps of this algorithm in order to apply it to Q-TCM. First, we
generalize the group selection step (4.4.1) for the quantile loss function. Second,
the refitting step (4.4.3) is modified to learn the new linear model using a
quantile loss function. We begin with a discussion of quantile regression. Let
and denote the response vector and data matrix, respectively. Quantile
regression assumes that the -th quantile is given by

                                                                                4.3
where           is the coefficient vector that we want to estimate in dimensions
and      is the cumulative distribution function for a multivariate random
variable with the same distribution as      . Let            be the vector of
residuals. Quantile regression is traditionally solved using the following “check-
function”:



where the operations are taken element-wise; note that setting        yields the
least absolute deviation (LAD) loss. Denote the quantile regression solution for a
linear model as:



Quantile regression can be solved efficiently using various methods; for
example, the regression problem can be rewritten as a linear program. In the case
of Q-TCM, quantile regression is used to fit a linear model with the currently
selected groups at each iteration. Thus, each iteration solves a larger regression
problem, but in practice the total number of groups selected in most applications
tends to be small. Our implementation uses an interior point (IP) method
described in Aravkin et al. (2013) to solve the quantile regression problem. In
short, the IP method rewrites the check function in a variational form,



and applies the Newton method to solve the optimality conditions of the
resulting min-max optimization problem. Structure of the problem is crucial to
an efficient implementation. We now discuss how to modify Algorithm 4.3 for
Q-TCM. The group selection step is generalized to select the group that
maximizes the projection onto the direction of steepest descent (i.e., gradient)
with respect to the loss function. In the case of Q-TCM, the selection step
becomes:



where                    and                          is a subgradient of the
quantile loss evaluated at      . The second change replaces the refitting step
with                 . The fully modified version of group OMP tailored for Q-
TCM is given in Figure 4.5.
                                               [
   1. Input
        Data
        Group structure               , such that       .
        The response
        Precision         for the stopping criterion.
   2. Output
        The selected groups       .
        The regression coefficients        .
   3.
    Initialization
            ,        .
   4.
       Selection
       For
   [
         Let                                            , where                  .

         If                         break,
         Set                . Let               .
   ]
       End
Figure 4.5 Method Quantile group OMP.

4.4.2 Experiments
We analyze the iShares dataset used in Section 4.1, after introducing a few
outliers, and illustrate how using a quantile loss function can discover the same
causal relationships in the presence of outliers as an loss function can discover
without the outliers (but cannot discover with them). United States The focus is
on learning a model for the United States for the period April 18, 2005, through
April 10, 2008 (the second row of Table 4.1). In Section 4.1, we showed that a
TCM model for the United States is (statistically) significantly improved by
including time-series data pertaining to Japan, South Korea, and China. This is a
period where Asian-traded companies have a major influence on US-traded
companies. We introduce three outliers into the original data. Figure 4.6
displays the original time-series, during the period of interest, with the noisy
dates represented by red circles. Note that each data point is a monthly return
and that consecutive points are consecutive days, so that the period for
computing the return overlaps on all but one day (and hence there are long
periods of correlation as opposed to daily returns that would appear as white
noise). While these outliers have been introduced, they are on the same
magnitude with the largest magnitude dates of the original data. Outlier detection
algorithms could likely detect at least two of the outliers simply because they
occur suddenly. The outlier on 01/16/2008 occurs during an event with an
already highly negative return.
Figure 4.6 Log-returns for ticker IVV (which tracks S&P 500) from April 18,
2005, through April 10, 2008. Outliers introduced on 10/26/2005, 12/14/2007,
and 01/16/2008 are represented by red circles.
A look at the data shows possible outliers and that Q-TCM should be considered.
The grid of quantiles considered here is a default grid that can be used when no
other information is known. Given extra information about the noise, a particular
set of quantiles could be considered. We consider the following quantiles:
                                      . Models here are limited to selecting a total
of five regressor time-series, including the target IVV (which tracks S&P 500),
so only four additional time-series can be included. The selected regressors for
each of the models after running Q-TCM and TCM are given in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3 Time-series selected for IVV, which tracks S&P 500, using Q-TCM
and TCM on noisy data. The correct features are South Korea, Japan, and China,
which are discovered by Q-TCM
Q-TCM      Q-TCM Q-TCM Q-TCM Q-TCM Q-TCM Q-TCM                              TCM

Gld &      Gld & Gld &         Gld &      Gld &      Gld &      Gld &     Gld &
Slvr       Slvr   Slvr         Slvr       Slvr       Slvr       Slvr      Slvr
Japan      Oil & Japan         South      South      South      South     Taiwan
           Gas                 Korea      Korea      Korea      Korea
Brazil     France Mexico       Japan      Japan      Japan      Japan     Canada
South      Mexico South        China      China      China      China     China
Korea             Korea
In order to select the best model, we use data for the three months following the
model generation period to learn which model fits best. The test period is
04/11/2008 through 07/11/2008. The Q-TCM and TCM models learned above
are used to predict returns in the test period, and the mean squared error (MSE)
is computed for the predictions on the test data for each model. The losses for
the seven Q-TCM models and TCM are given in Table 4.4. TCM clearly has the
worst loss on the test data and is thus not a good model to use. The best model,
by a very small margin, is the Q-TCM model for the 0.90 quantile, so that model
is selected. As we have seen here, this model selects Japan, South Korea, and
China as significant factors, which is consistent with the uncorrupted data (see
Section 4.1). Note that models with each of the quantiles
select the same model as TCM selected on the uncorrupted data (which, while
not a ground truth, is an estimate). In this example, the squared loss grossly
penalized the outliers, but various versions of an absolute value penalty (i.e.,
quantile penalty at different quantiles) would have sufficed. With additional
noise, Q-TCM was required here to learn a sufficient model, whereas if TCM
was used here with the default squared loss, then Taiwan, Canada, and China
would have been selected instead of the model selected on the uncorrupted data.
Table 4.4 MSE on test period for Q-TCM and TCM models for IVV on noisy
data
  Q-TCM Q-TCM Q-TCM Q-TCM Q-TCM Q-TCM Q-TCM                              TCM




4.5 TCM with Regime Change Identification
In Section 4.2, we described TCM to accurately model causal relationships.
However, we did not attempt to capture time-dependent variations in causal
relationships; in Section 4.1, we saw an example of iShares, where the causal
relationships vary with time. In this section, we extend TCM to incorporate such
temporal information and identity regime changes (Jiang et al., 2012). Formally,
the main goal of this section is to describe a computationally efficient
methodology to model the time-varying dependency structure underlying
multivariate time-series data, with a particular focus on regime change
identification. For this purpose, we marry the TCM framework with the Markov
switching modeling framework; specifically, we describe a Bayesian Markov
switching model for estimating TCMs (MS-TCM).
The key idea is to introduce a latent state variable that captures the regime from
which observations at each time period are drawn (Chib, 1998). We allow this
latent variable to return to any previous state, which closely resembles reality
and allows one to overcome sample scarcity by borrowing strength across
samples that are not adjacent in time. Each regime is governed by a TCM model.
For group variable selection with TCM, we extend a hierarchical Bayesian
framework that adds flexibility to the original group lasso (Yuan and Lin, 2006;
Zhao et al., 2006). Briefly, a hierarchical prior is specified for the regression
coefficients, which results in maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation with
sparsity-inducing regularization; this can be seen as an iteratively reweighted
adaptive group lasso estimator. Here, adaptivity refers to the fact that the penalty
amount may differ across groups of regression coefficients, similar to adaptive
lasso (Zou, 2006). Moreover, the penalty parameter is iteratively updated,
therefore alleviating the need for parameter tuning (as opposed to non-Bayesian
approaches). An additional benefit of such a quasi-Bayesian approach is its
computational efficiency, which allows for graceful accommodation of high-
dimensional datasets.
By combining a Markov-switching framework with Bayesian group lasso, MS-
TCM provides a natural and integrated modeling framework to both capture
regime changes and estimate TCM. The rest of this section is laid out as follows.
In Section 4.5.1, we present the combined Markov switching model for TCM. In
Section 4.5.2, we present algorithms to efficiently solve the combined model. In
Sections 4.5.3 and 4.5.4, we present experiments that demonstrate the power of
TCM with regime change identification.

4.5.1 Model
Markov-switching Model for TCM
To extend the TCM model in Section 4.2, we propose a Markov switching VAR
model as follows: introduce a latent state variable ,                 for each
time point, where is the total number of possible states and stands for the
state at time . Given the state variables     , we can model the observed data
    ( time series at time ) using the VAR model,

                                                                                 4.4


As before, is the number of features, is the maximum lag, and                is the
coefficient of the lagged variable of the time series for the model of the
response variable when the regime is given by . Note that the state variables
               are defined jointly on all responses; that is, they do not depend on
  . This introduces a tight coupling amongst models for the different time-series,
which is a departure from Sections 4.2 and 4.4 where a model for each response
could be estimated independently. Note that without introducing such coupling
amongst the different responses, we would not be able to define and identify
regimes and associated change points that are common across all responses. The
states are modeled as a Markov chain using                as the transition
probability matrix, where    is the transition probability from state to :


We do not impose any restrictions on the structure of , which allows for the
random process to go back to a previous state or forward to a new state (unlike
in Chib (1998). From (4.4), if two time points are from the same state, they will
have the same set of autoregression coefficients; that is,                  iff
            . For simplicity, we denote the regression coefficients at state by
    in the rest of this chapter.

Temporal Causal Modeling via the Bayesian Group Lasso
To map the VAR model coefficients into the dependency structure of the TCMs,
we make use of a group lasso technique for variable group selection. For a given
      , we define                  as a coefficient group. We adapt the
Bayesian hierarchical framework for group variable selection in Lee et al. (2010)
as follows:

                                                                                  4.5




where        represents a gamma distribution with density function
                   , and       represents an inverse gamma distribution
whose density function is                         . This hierarchical formulation
implies an adaptive version of the group lasso algorithm and allows for
automatic update of the smoothing parameters. As suggested in Lee et al.
(2010),     can be estimated by the following MAP estimate:



Integrating out   ,     in (4.5), the marginal density for    can be written as
where                      is the    norm of      . We note that the marginal
distribution includes the norm of         , which is directly related to the penalty
term in the group lasso. However, the marginal likelihood resulting from the
hierarchical group lasso prior is not concave, which means that search for the
global mode by direct maximization is not feasible. An alternative approach
proposed in Lee et al. (2010) is to find local modes of the posterior using the
expectation–maximization (EM) algorithm (McLachlan and Krishnan, 2008)
with      being treated as latent variables. This leads to the following iteratively
reweighted minimization algorithm,



where                  . For the parameters in the transition probability matrix, we
assign the Dirichlet distribution as their prior distributions: for a given state ,
the transition probabilities to all possible states                   take the form
                 , where are the hyperparameters in the Dirichlet distribution.
A popular choice is          , corresponding to a noninformative prior on the       s.
The Dirichlet distribution – the conjugate prior for the multinomial distribution –
is a popular prior for the probabilities of discrete random variables due to its
computational efficiency. Note that the noninformative prior on the transition
probability does not imply that the states are equally likely at a transition; the
transition probabilities will also be updated according to the data likelihood.
Finally, to complete the Bayesian hierarchical model, we assign the following
noninformative prior to the variances,              .4

Choosing the Number of States
An important parameter in the previous sections was , the number of states in
the Markov switching network. To determine this, we utilize the Bayesian
information criterion (BIC) (Schwarz, 1978), which is defined as
                        , where          is the log likelihood of the observed
data under    ,     is the number of parameters, and is the number of
observations. The first term in BIC measures the goodness of fit for a Markov
model with states, while the second term is an increasing function of the
number of parameters , which penalizes the model complexity. Following
(Yuan and Lin, 2006), the complexity of our model with an underlying group
sparse structure can be written as:




where     are the parameters estimated by ordinary-least-squares estimates. We
thus estimate , the total number of states, by the value that has minimum BIC
value.

4.5.2 Algorithm
Let                         , be the tensor of parameters,                      , and
recall that is the transition matrix and is the observed data. The unknown
parameters in our model are                  , which we estimate using MAP
estimates obtained by maximizing the posterior distribution                . In this
section, we develop an efficient algorithm to find the MAP estimates using an
EM approach (McLachlan and Krishnan, 2008) where the state variables are
treated as missing data. When the goal is to find MAP estimates, the EM
algorithm converges to the local modes of the posterior distribution by
iteratively alternating between an expectation (E)step and a maximization (M)
step, as follows. In the E-step, we compute the expectation of the joint posterior
distribution of latent variables and unknown parameters, conditional on the
observed data, denoted by               . Let be the -dimensional vector of
observations at time , and          is the collection of the measurements from time
   to . For simplicity, we set                     to be the initial information
consisting of the first observations and then relabel                  for        . Then
we have,
where      denotes the probability density function,
and                                       is the posterior probability of all hidden
state variables, and                      is the probability of the initial state
being . In the E-step, the posterior probability     and        can be calculated
using the three-step backward-and-forward algorithm (Baum et al., 1970) as
follows:
   1. Compute the forward probability                                    by going
   forward iteratively in time




   2. Compute the backward probability
   by going backward iteratively in time




   3. Compute the posterior probability
   and




In the M-step, we update        by maximizing           , as follows.
   1. The VAR coefficients           are estimated by minimizing




   where                       and the updated weights are calculated as
                     . This regularized minimization problem can be transformed
   into a standard group lasso formulation (Yuan and Lin, 2006) by
   appropriately rescaling     and . The resulting group lasso problem can be
   solved efficiently by using the optimization procedure proposed by Meier et
   al. (2008).
   2. The variance         of each of the Markov states is updated as




   where                        .
   3. The transition probability        is updated as




   4. The initial probability              .
To summarize, the proposed EM algorithm is computationally efficient; the
           can be derived in closed form in the E-step, the maximization in the
M-step can be transformed into a standard group lasso formulation (Yuan and
Lin, 2006), and the maximization can be carried out very efficiently by using the
optimization procedure in Meier et al. (2008). The algorithm iterates between
the E-step and M-step until it converges.

4.5.3 Synthetic Experiments
Data Synthesis
We investigate the performance of MS-TCM on synthetic data with respect to
identifying the switching states and the resulting TCM networks. We considered
      and        states while generating the synthetic data. The synthetic data are
generated according to the following steps.
   1. Generate the state assignment sequence. Instead of assuming that the true
   generative process for the states is a Markov switching process, we randomly
   sampled       change points and randomly assign states to each block. We
   relax the Markov assumption to test if our model still enables us to identify
   the underlying true process under a more general and realistic condition.
   2. Generate a random directed graph (the true network) with a specified
   edge probability. We generated a set of        adjacency matrices           ,
   where the entry         indicates that at Markov state , influences , and
           otherwise. The value of each entry was chosen by sampling from a
   binomial distribution, where the probability that an entry equals to one was
   set to 0.2.
   3. Create a sparse Markov switching VAR model that corresponds to the
   Markov states and the networks generated in the previous two steps. For
   each Markov state, the VAR coefficients                  were sampled
   according to a normal distribution with mean 0 and SD 0.20 if        , and
   set to be 0 otherwise. The noise SD was set at 0.01 for all states.
   4. Simulate data from the above switching VAR model. The sample size per
   feature per lag per state was set at 10. We considered    and maximum
   lags       and       .

Evaluation
To evaluate the accuracy of the switching states estimation, we use the Rand
index (Rand, 1971), where we treat the switching modeling problem as
clustering multivariate data vector                    into Markov states. The
Rand index is often used to measure the clustering error and is defined as the
fraction of all misclustered pairs of data vectors      . Letting  and denote
the true and estimated clustering maps, respectively, the Rand index is defined
by                        . To evaluate the accuracy of the DBN estimation, we
use the score: larger values of the Rand index and         score indicate higher
accuracy.
We compare our method (MS-TCM) with two comparison methods: Fused-DBN
and TV-DBN. Fused-DBN is a change point detection method extending the
method of Kolar et al. (2009) to the VAR setting, which estimates change points
via fused lasso penalized regression and subsequently estimates sparse static
networks for each segment separately. TV-DBN (Song et al., 2009) is used,
although the simulation setting is not favorable to it, only to illustrate that in
real-world settings where networks are not smoothly and constantly varying over
time, approaches like TV-DBN usually fall short.

Results
The results of our experiments are summarized in Table 4.5, where we show
respectively the average score for MS-TCM, Fused-DBN, and TV-DBN, and
the average Rand index for our method only (since to our knowledge our method
is the only method allowing for regime identification in DBNs) over 100 runs,
along with the standard errors. Overall, MS-TCM has very good accuracy under
a varying number of Markov states. Rand indices do not change much from
small-to large-number states, which suggests similar accuracy in change point
detection. The scores, smaller under            , suggest that the dependency
structure may be more accurately recovered when the relationships involve
multiple time lags, illustrating the value of our Bayesian group lasso
subprocedure. This approach achieves significantly better accuracy than the
other methods for all the cases considered. Computationally, our algorithm is
more efficient when compared to Fused-DBN as Fused-DBN involves applying
randomized lasso to a transformed data matrix of dimensions             ; this implies
that the number of features effectively considered is times higher than the
actual number of features. This can be a significant impediment even in low-
dimensional settings; for example, for 10 features and 1000 time points, one has
to work with 10,000 features after the transformation. In addition, Fused-DBN is
unable to leverage the grouping structure corresponding to dependencies with
      .
Table 4.5 Accuracy of comparison methods in identifying the correct Bayesian
networks measured by the average Rand index and score on synthetic data
with a varying number of Markov states (K) and lags (L). The numbers in the
parentheses are standard errors
                  Type Method         K=2 K=2 K=5 K=5
                                      L=1 L=3 L=1 L=3
                  Rand MS-TCM         0.94 0.96 0.97 0.97
                  index
                          Fused-DBN
                          TV-DBN
                          MS-TCM    0.76 0.91        0.76    0.87
                  score
                          Fused-DBN           0.50   0.53    0.52

                          TV-DBN       0.36 0.38     0.50    0.40


Another strength of MS-TCM, compared to Fused-DBN and other change point–
based methods proposed in the literature, is in the setting of regime change
identification. In the existing methods, once the change points have been
estimated, the coefficients are estimated individually for each interval. Hence, if
some of the intervals between two subsequent change points are small (which
may happen in many practical situations), the algorithms may be forced to work
with extremely small sample size, thus leading to poor estimates. In contrast, our
method considers all states and allows for return to previous states. It is thus able
to borrow strength across a wider number of samples that may be far away in
time.
We now turn our attention to the results obtained by MS-TCM, using the
synthetic data with         and      . According to BIC, the number of states is
estimated as 2. In the left panel of Figure 4.7, we show the Markov path
estimated by our method and the true path for a particular simulation run, where
the transition jumps highlighted in red in the true path (upper panel) are those
missed by our method. As shown in the plot, MS-TCM is able to detect the
change points with very little delay. We also observe that MS-TCM tends to
miss a transition when the process remains in a single state for too short a
duration. In practice, however, such transient jumps rarely happen or may be of
less interest in real applications. In the right panel of Figure 4.7 we show the
corresponding estimated Bayesian networks along with the true networks. In the
true networks (left column), we highlighted in red the false negatives (edges that
exist in the true graphs but are missed in the estimated graphs) and in the
estimated networks (right column) we highlighted in green the false positives
(edges that do not exist in the true graphs but are selected in the method). As we
can see from the plot, the estimated Bayesian networks exhibit reasonable
agreement with the true networks.




Figure 4.7 (Left) Output switching path on one synthetic dataset with two
Markov states. Transition jumps missing in the estimated Markov path are
highlighted in red. (Right) The corresponding output networks: (a) true network
at state 1; (b) estimated network at state 1; (c) true network at state 2; and (d)
estimated network at state 2. Edges coded in red are the false positives, and those
in green are the false negatives.

4.5.4 Application: Analyzing Stock Returns
To demonstrate MS-TCM's utility in finance, we apply MS-TCM on monthly
stock return data from 60 monthly stock observations from 2004-10-01 to 2009-
09-01 for 24 stocks in six industries. For simplicity, we consider that each state
is associated to a VAR model with lag 1. MS-TCM identifies one change point
at the 19th time point. The VAR model coefficients for the TCM models
concerning Citigroup (C), before and after that change point, are presented in
Figure 4.8 along with the model produced when assuming a single static causal
model (i.e., running vanilla TCM). By examining the models, one can get some
insights on the varying causal relationships. Another benefit of this approach is
the potential to improve forecasting accuracy. For instance, if we treat the 60th
time point as unobserved, then MS-TCM can forecast this point with relative
error of 0.5%, while a static TCM approach has a higher relative error of 26%.5




Figure 4.8 Results of modeling monthly stock observations using MS-TCM.
MS-TCM uncovered a regime change after the 19th time step; columns Model 1
and Model 2 contain the coefficients of the corresponding two TCM models.
The column Model all gives the coefficients when plain TCM without regime
identification is used. The symbols C, KEY, WFC, and JPM are money center
banks; SO, DUK, D, HE, and EIX are electrical utilities companies; LUX, CAL,
and AMR are major airlines; AMGN, GILD, CELG, GENZ, and BIIB are
biotechnology companies; CAT, DE, and HIT are machinery manufacturers;
IMO, HES, and YPF are fuel refineries; and X.GPSC is an index.

4.6 Conclusions
In this chapter, we presented TCM, a method that builds on Granger causality
and generalizes it to multivariate time-series by linking the causality inference
process to the estimation of sparse VAR models. We also presented extensions
to TCM that allow users to determine causal strengths of causal relationships,
use quantile loss functions, and automatically identify and efficiently model
regime changes with TCM. TCM and its extensions that were presented in this
chapter can be an important tool in financial analysis.

4.6.1 Further Reading
There are some extensions to TCM that were not covered in this chapter. For
example, in order to expose the readers to a variety of approaches, we presented
some extensions of TCM using group OMP, and others using group lasso or
Bayesian variants. We encourage the readers to experiment with these methods
to determine the “best” method for their specific problems. Other extensions that
were not covered include extending TCM for modeling spatiotemporal data
(Lozano et al., 2009c), modeling multiple related time-series datasets (Liu et al.,
2010), and modeling nonlinear VAR models (Sindhwani et al., 2013).

References
Aravkin, A. Y., Burke, J. V. and Pillonetto, G. (2013). Sparse/robust estimation
and Kalman smoothing with nonsmooth log-concave densities: modeling,
computation, and theory. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 14, 2689–
2728.
Aravkin, A.Y., Kambadur, A., Lozano, A.C., Luss, R. (2014). Orthogonal
matching pursuit for sparse quantile regression. IEEE International Conference
on Data Mining (ICDM).
Arnold, A., Liu, Y. and Abe, N. (2007). Temporal causal modeling with
graphical Granger methods. Proceedings of the Thirteenth ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/∼aarnold/cald/frp781-arnold.pdf
Baum, L., Petrie, T., Soules, G. and Weiss, N. (1970). A maximization technique
occurring in the statistical analysis of probabilistic functions of Markov chains.
The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 41(1), 164–171.
Biard, D. and Ducommun, B. (2008). Moderate variations in CDC25B protein
levels modulate the response to DNA damaging agents. Cell Cycle, 7(14), 2234–
2240.
Carpenter, J. and Bithell, J. (2000). Bootstrap confidence intervals: when, which,
what? A practical guide for medical statisticians. Statistics in Medicine, 19,
1141–1164.
Chib, S. (1998). Estimation and comparison of multiple change-point models.
Journal of Econometrics, 86, 221–241.
Dahlhaus, R. and Eichler, M. (2003). Causality and graphical models in time
series analysis. In Highly structured stochastic systems (ed. P. Green, N. Hjort
and S. Richardson). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Davison, A.C. and Hinkley, D. (2006). Bootstrap methods and their
applications. Cambridge Series in Statistical and Probabilistic Mathematics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Enders, W. (2003). Applied econometric time series, 2nd ed. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons.
Fujita, A., et al. (2007). Modeling gene expression regulator networks with the
sparse vector autoregressive model. BMC Systems Biology, 1, 39.
Furstenthal, L., Kaiser, B.K., Swanson, C. and Jackson, P.K.J. (2001). Cyclin E
uses Cdc6 as a chromatin-associated receptor required for DNA replication.
Journal of Cell Biology, 152(6), 1267–1278.
Granger, C. (1980). Testing for causality: a personal viewpoint. Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, 2, 329–352.
Green, P.J. and Silverman, B.W. (1994). Nonparametric regression and
generalized linear models: a roughness penalty approach. London: Chapman
and Hall.
Jiang, H., Lozano, A.C. and Liu, F. (2012). A Bayesian Markov-switching
model for sparse dynamic network estimation. Proceedings of 2012 SIAM
International Conference on Data Mining.
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?
doi=10.1.1.370.3422&rep=rep1&type=pdf
Kolar, M., Song, L. and Xing, E. P. (2009). Sparsistent learning of varying-
coefficient models with structural changes. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 1006–1014.
Lee, A., Caron, F., Doucet, A. and Holmes, C. (2010). A hierarchical Bayesian
framework for constructing sparsity-inducing priors.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1009.1914
Li, X., et al. (2006). Discovery of time-delayed gene regulatory networks based
on temporal gene expression profiling. BMC Bioinformatics, 7, 26.
Liu, Y., Fan, S.W., Ding, J.Y., Zhao, X., Shen, W.L. (2007). Growth inhibition
of MG-63 cells by cyclin A2 gene-specific small interfering RNA. Zhonghua Yi
Xue Za Zhi, 87(9), 627–33 (in Chinese).
Liu, Y., Niculescu-Mizil, A., Lozano, A.C. and Lu, Y. (2010). Learning
temporal graphs for relational time-series analysis. Proceedings of the 27th
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). http://www.niculescu-
mizil.org/papers/hMRF-ICML_final.pdf
Loftus, J. R. and Taylor J. E. (2014). A significance test for forward stepwise
model selection. arXiv:1405.3920
Lozano, A.C., Abe N., Liu Y. and Rosset, S. (2009a). Grouped graphical
Granger modeling for gene expression regulatory network discovery.
Proceedings of 17th Annual International Conference on Intelligent System for
Molecular Biology (ISMB) and Bioinformatics, 25 (12).
http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/content/25/12/i110.short
Lozano, A.C., Abe N., Liu Y., Rosset, S. (2009b). Grouped graphical Granger
modeling methods for temporal causal modeling. In Proceedings of 15th ACM
SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 2009, 577–586.
Lozano, A.C., Li, H., Niculescu-Mizil, A., Liu Y., Perlich C., Hosking, J.R.M.
and Abe, N. (2009c). Spatial-temporal causal modeling for climate change
attribution. In Proceedings of 15th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining 2009, 587–596.
Lozano, A.C., Swirszcz, G.M. and Abe, N. (2009d). Group orthogonal matching
pursuit for variable selection and prediction. Proceedings of the Neural
Information Processing Systems Conference (NIPS).
http://papers.nips.cc/paper/3878-grouped-orthogonal-matching-pursuit-for-
variable-selection-and-prediction.pdf
McLachlan, G.J. and Krishnan, T. (2008). The EM algorithm and extensions.
New York: Wiley-Interscience.
Meier, L., van de Geer, S. and Bühlmann, P. (2008). The group lasso for logistic
regression. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 70(1), 53–71.
Meinshausen, N. and Buhlmann, P. (2006). High dimensional graphs and
variable selection with the lasso. Annals of Statistics, 34(3), 1436–1462.
Meinshausen, N. and Yu, B. (2006). Lasso-type recovery of sparse
representations for high-dimensional data. Technical Report, Statistics.
Berkeley: University of California, Berkeley.
Mukhopadhyay, N.D. and Chatterjee, S. (2007). Causality and pathway search in
microarray time series experiment. Bioinformatics, 23(4).
Ong, I.M., Glasner, J.D. and Page, D. (2002) Modelling regulatory pathways in
E. coli from time series expression profiles. Bioinformatics, 18, S241–S248.
Opgen-Rhein, R. and Strimmer, K. (2007). Learning causal networks from
systems biology time course data: an effective model selection procedure for the
vector autoregressive process. BMC Bioinformatics, 8(Suppl. 2), S3.
Rand, W. (1971). Objective criteria for the evaluation of clusterings methods.
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 66(336), 846–850.
Ray, D. and Kiyokawa, H. (2007). CDC25A levels determine the balance of
proliferation and checkpoint response. Cell Cycle, 156(24), 3039–3042.
Salon, C., et al. (2007). Links E2F-1, Skp2 and cyclin E oncoproteins are
upregulated and directly correlated in high-grade neuroendocrine lung tumors.
Oncogene, 26(48), 6927–6936.
Sambo, F., Di Camillo, B. and Toffolo G. (2008). CNET: an algorithm for
reverse engineering of causal gene networks. In: Bioinformatics methods for
biomedical complex systems applications, 8th Workshop on Network Tools and
Applications in Biology NETTAB2008, Varenna, Italy, 134–136.
Schwarz, G. E. (1978). Estimating the dimension of a model. Annals of
Statistics, 6(2).
Segal, E., et al. (2003). Module networks: identifying regulatory modules and
their condition-specific regulators from gene expression data. Nature Genetics,
34, 166–176.
Sindhwani, V., Minh, H.W., Lozano, A.C. (2013). Scalable matrix-valued kernel
learning and high-dimensional nonlinear causal inference. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI).
http://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1408/1408.2066.pdf
Song, L., Kolar, M. and Xing, E. P. (2009). Time-varying dynamic Bayesian
networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 1732–1740.
Tibshirani, R. (1996). Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 58(1), 267–288.
Whitfield, M.L., et al. (2002). Identification of genes periodically expressed in
the human cell cycle and their expression in tumors, Molecular Biology of the
Cell, 13(6). Dataset available at http://genome-www.stanford.edu/Human-
CellCycle/Hela/
Xu, X., Wang, L. and Ding, D. (2004). Learning module networks from genome-
wide location and expression data. FEBS Letters, 578, 297–304.
Yamaguchi, R., Yoshida, R., Imoto, S., Higuchi, T. and Miyano, S. (2007).
Finding module-based gene networks in time-course gene expression data with
state space models. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 24, 37–46.
Yuan, M. and Lin, Y. (2006). Model selection and estimation in regression with
grouped variables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 68, 49–67.
Zou, H. (2006). The adaptive lasso and its oracle properties. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 101(476), 1418–1429.
Zou, H., Hastie, T. and Tibshirani, R. (2007). On the “degrees of freedom” of the
lasso. Annals of Statistics, 35(5), 2173–2192.
Zhao, P., Rocha, G. and Yu, B. (2006). Grouped and hierarchical model
selection through composite absolute penalties.
http://statistics.berkeley.edu/sites/default/files/tech-reports/703.pdf
1 Superscripts represent features; for example,    is the    feature or the
   time-series.
2 Although causal strengths can be estimated for group lasso, we have not tried it
   in practice and therefore omit discussion.
3 While this procedure is significantly less computationally intensive, the Monte

   Carlo simulations are sufficient for our purposes. However, we have not had
   the opportunity to try out this method.
4 We use       instead of the commonly used        to denote probability
   distributions as we use to refer to the number of features/time-series and
       to refer to the individual probabilities in , the probability transition
   matrix.
5 It is possible to leave out and predict more points than 1; we choose to predict

   just the 60th point for simplicity.
Chapter 5
Explicit Kernel and Sparsity of Eigen Subspace
for the AR(1) Process
   Mustafa U. Torun, Onur Yilmaz and Ali N. Akansu
   New Jersey Institute of Technology, USA

5.1 Introduction
Karhunen–Loeve Transform (KLT), also called Eigen decomposition or
principal component analysis (PCA), is the optimal orthogonal subspace method
(block transform) that maps wide-sense stationary (WSS) stochastic signals with
correlations into nonstationary and pairwise uncorrelated transform coefficients.
The coefficient with the highest variance corresponds to the most covariability
among the observed signals, hence the most meaningful information (Akansu
and Haddad, 1992). Therefore, the coefficients with large variances are kept and
the ones with low variances corresponding to noise are discarded in noise-
filtering and compression applications (Jolliffe, 2002). KLT basis functions are
the eigenvectors of the given signal covariance matrix that define the
corresponding unique eigen subspace. Therefore, it is a signal-dependent
transform as opposed to some other popular transforms like discrete Fourier
transform (DFT) and discrete cosine transform (DCT). DFT and DCT have their
kernels that are independent of signal statistics. They are called fixed transforms,
and their good performance with efficient implementations make them desirable
choices for various applications (Akansu and Haddad, 1992). Fast
implementation of KLT is of great interest to several disciplines, and there were
attempts to derive closed-form kernel expressions for certain classes of
stochastic processes. Such kernels for continuous and discrete stochastic
processes with exponential autocorrelation function were reported in the
literature (Davenport and Root, 1958; Pugachev, 1959a,b; Ray and Driver, 1970;
Wilkinson, 1965). We focus on the discrete autoregressive order one, AR(1), and
the process and derivation of its explicit eigen kernel, in this chapter. In Section
5.4, we investigate the sparsity of such eigen subspace and present a rate-
distortion theory-based sparsing method. Moreover, we highlight the merit of the
method for the AR(1) process as well as for the empirical correlation matrix of
stock returns in the NASDAQ-100 index.
5.2 Mathematical Definitions
5.2.1 Discrete AR(1) Stochastic Signal Model
Random processes and information sources are often described by a variety of
stochastic signal models, including autoregressive (AR), moving average (MA),
and autoregressive moving average (ARMA) types. Discrete AR source models,
also called all-pole models, have been successfully used in applications
including speech processing for decades (Atal and Hanauer, 1971). The first-
order AR model, AR(1), is a first approximation to many natural signals and has
been widely employed in various disciplines. Its continuous analogue is called
the Ornstein–Uhlenbeck (OU) process with popular use in physical sciences and
mathematical finance (Doob, 1942; Uhlenbeck and Ornstein, 1930). The AR(1)
signal is generated through the first-order regression formula written as (Akansu
and Haddad, 1992; Kay, 1988):

                                                                                 5.1
where      is a zero-mean white noise sequence, that is,

                                                                                 5.2


      is the expectation operator, and is the Kronecker delta function. The
first-order correlation coefficient, , is real in the range of       , and the
variance of       is given as follows:

                                                                                 5.3

The autocorrelation sequence of      is expressed as

                                                                                 5.4
The resulting       Toeplitz autocorrelation matrix for the AR(1) process is
expressed as
                                                                               5.5




5.2.2 Orthogonal Subspace
A family of linearly independent orthonormal real discrete-time sequences
(vectors),       , on the interval        , satisfies the inner product
relationship (Akansu and Haddad, 1992)

                                                                               5.6


Equivalently, the orthonormality can also be expressed on the unit circle of the
complex plane,                   , as follows:

                                                                               5.7


where        is the discrete time Fourier transform (DTFT) of        . In matrix
form,        are the rows of the transform matrix, also called basis functions:

                                                                               5.8
with the matrix orthonormality property stated as

                                                                              5.9
where    indicates a transposed version of a matrix or a vector. A random signal
vector

                                                                              5.10
is mapped onto the orthonormal subspace through a forward transform operator
(projection)

                                                                              5.11
where    is the transform coefficients vector given as

                                                                                5.12
Similarly, the inverse transform reconstructs the signal vector

                                                                                5.13
Hence, one can derive the correlation matrix of transform coefficients as
follows:

                                                                                5.14
Furthermore, total energy represented by the transform coefficients is written as:

                                                                                5.15


It follows from (5.9) and (5.11) that

                                                                                5.16


where        is the variance of the nth element of the signal vector given in (5.10)
that is equal to . It follows from (5.15) and (5.16) that

                                                                                5.17


The energy-preserving property of an orthonormal transform is evident in (5.17).
It is also noted in (5.11) that the linear transformation of the stationary random
vector process results in a nonstationary random coefficient vector process ,
that is,         for      (Akansu and Haddad, 1992).

5.2.2.1 Karhunen–Loeve Transform (Eigen Subspace)
KLT jointly provides the (i) optimal geometric mean of coefficient variances
with a diagonal correlation matrix, , in (5.14); and (ii) best possible repacking
of signal energy into as few transform coefficients as possible. KLT minimizes
the energy of the approximation error due to use of only basis functions
in order to approximate covariance subject to the orthonormality constraint given
in (5.9). Hence, the cost function is defined as (Akansu and Haddad, 1992):

                                                                              5.18


where     is the kth Lagrangian multiplier. (5.18) can be rewritten as

                                                                              5.19


Taking gradient of one of the components of the error (i.e., ), with respect to
   and setting it to zero as follows (Akansu and Haddad, 1992):

                                                                              5.20

yields

                                                                              5.21
which implies that     is one of the eigenvectors of     and is the
corresponding eigenvalue. It is evident from (5.21) that the basis set for KLT
comprises the eigenvectors of the autocorrelation matrix of the input (i.e., ),
and it needs to be recalculated whenever signal statistics change. It follows from
(5.21) that

                                                                              5.22



where                                ; and the kth column of    matrix is the kth
eigenvector      of     with the corresponding eigenvalue . It is noted that
            , for the given     where is the variance of the kth transform
coefficient, (Akansu and Haddad, 1992).

5.2.2.2 Performance Metrics for Orthogonal Subspaces
In practice, it is desired that variances of the transform coefficients decrease as
the coefficient index increases, and so the signal energy is consolidated into as
small a number of transform coefficients as possible (Akansu and Haddad,
1992). In other words, it is desired to minimize the energy of the approximation
error defined as:

                                                                              5.23


where              . There are three commonly used metrics to measure the
performance of a given orthonormal transform (subspace) (Akansu and Haddad,
1992). The compaction efficiency of a transform, that is, the ratio of the energy
in the first transform coefficients to the total energy, is defined as

                                                                              5.24


This is an important metric to assess the efficiency of a transform for the given
signal type.
The gain of transform coding (TC) over pulse code modulation (PCM)
performance of an          unitary transform for a given input correlation is
particularly significant and widely utilized in transform coding applications as
defined:

                                                                              5.25


Similarly, decorrelation efficiency of a transform is defined as

                                                                              5.26


It is desired to have high compaction efficiency,      ; high gain of TC over
PCM,        ; and high decorrelation efficiency, , for a given        orthonormal
transform. Detailed discussion on the performance metrics for the orthonormal
transforms can be found in Akansu and Haddad, 1992.
In Figure 5.1a,         of KLT and the popular fixed transform DCT (Akansu and
Haddad, 1992) are displayed for the AR(1) process with various correlation
coefficients and transform size          . Similarly, Figure 5.1b depicts
performances of KLT and DCT as a function of for               . This figure
justifies the use of fixed transform DCT as a replacement to signal-dependent
KLT in applications where signal samples are highly correlated. Moreover, it is
noted that the energy-packing performances of both transforms degrade for
lower values of correlation coefficient. Hence, subspace methods bring less
value for applications where signal correlation is low.




Figure 5.1 (a)      Performance of KLT and DCT for an AR(1) process with
various values of   and      ; (b)   performance of KLT and DCT as a
function of for         .

5.3 Derivation of Explicit KLT Kernel for a
Discrete AR(1) Process
A KLT matrix        of size      for an AR(1) process is expressed with the
closed-form kernel as (Ray and Driver, 1970):
                                                                               5.27


where                . Corresponding transform coefficient variances (i.e., the
eigenvalues of the autocorrelation matrix given in (5.5), ) are derived to be in
the closed form (Ray and Driver, 1970):

                                                                               5.28

where       are the positive roots of the following transcendental equation (Ray
and Driver, 1970):

                                                                               5.29

The derivation steps leading to the equations (5.27), (5.28), and (5.29) will be
explained throughout this section. Moreover, there is a need to derive an explicit
expression for the roots of the transcendental equation in (5.29) such that the
kernel (eigenvectors) and the corresponding variances (eigenvalues) are
expressed accordingly.

5.3.1 A Simple Method for Explicit Solution of a
Transcendental Equation
A simple method of formulating an explicit solution for the roots of
transcendental equations using Cauchy's integral theorem from complex analysis
(Strang, 1986) that was introduced by Luck and Stevens (2002) is highlighted in
this section. The method determines the roots of a transcendental function by
locating the singularities of a reciprocal function. Although derivation steps are
detailed in Luck and Stevens (2002), a summary is given here for the
completeness of presentation.
Cauchy's theorem states that if a function is analytic in a simple connected
region containing the closed curve , the path integral of the function around the
curve is zero. On the other hand, if a function,        , contains a single
singularity at somewhere inside but analytic elsewhere in the region, then
the singularity can be removed by multiplying        with          (i.e., by a pole-
zero cancellation). Cauchy's theorem implies that the path integral of the new
function             around must be zero:
                                                                                 5.30


Evaluation of the integral given in (5.30) yields a first-order polynomial in
with constant coefficients, and its solution for provides the location of the
singularity as given (Luck and Stevens, 2002)

                                                                                 5.31

This is an explicit expression for the singularity of the function      . A root-
finding problem is restated as a singularity at the root. It is noted that (5.31)
gives the location of the desired root, and it can be evaluated for any closed path
by employing either an analytical or a numerical technique. Luck and Stevens
(2002) suggested to use a circle in the complex plane with its center and
radius as the closed curve , expressed as

                                                                                 5.32


where            ;      ; and     ; Values of and do not matter as long as
the circle circumscribes the root . Cauchy's argument principle (Brown and
Churchill, 2009) or graphical methods may be used to determine the number of
roots enclosed by the path . A function in is defined as

                                                                                 5.33
Then (5.31) becomes (Luck and Stevens, 2002):

                                                                                 5.34


One can easily evaluate (5.34) by employing Fourier analysis since the nth
Fourier series coefficient for any  is calculated as

                                                                                 5.35

It is observed that the term in brackets in (5.34) is equal to the ratio of the second
Fourier series coefficient over the first one for the function      . Fourier series
coefficients can be easily calculated numerically by using DFT or by using its
fast implementation, Fast Fourier transform (FFT), as is suggested in Luck and
Stevens (2002). However, it is observed from (5.34) that one does not need all
DFT coefficients to solve the problem since it requires only two Fourier series
coefficients. Therefore, it is possible to further improve the computational cost
by employing a discrete summation operator to implement (5.34) numerically.
Hence, the algorithm would have a computational complexity of            instead of
          required for FFT algorithms.
It is also noted that given     is analytic at , multiplying       by a factor
               does not change the location of the singularities of    . It means
that for a given singularity, the term in brackets is also equal to any ratio of the
           to the mth Fourier series coefficients of      for       (Luck and
Stevens, 2002). The MATLABTM code given in Torun and Akansu (2013) to
calculate the roots of (5.43) shows the simplicity of the method to solve such
transcendental equations.

5.3.2 Continuous Process with Exponential Autocorrelation
The classic problem of deriving explicit solutions for characteristic values and
functions of a continuous random process with an exponential autocorrelation
function provides the foundation for the derivation of explicit KLT kernel for a
discrete AR(1) process. This problem is discussed in Davenport and Root (1958)
and Van Trees (2001). Similar discussions can also be found in Pugachev
(1959a,b). After some derivation steps, the characteristic equation of the process
is expressed as

                                                                                 5.36

and (5.36) has a solution only in the range of            and is rewritten as
(Davenport and Root, 1958):

                                                                                 5.37
where

                                                                                 5.38

A general solution to (5.37) is given as
                                                                                  5.39
where and are arbitrary constants. A solution is possible only when
or         . For        , it is shown that one of the unknowns in the general
solution is given in (5.39), , satisfies the equation (Davenport and Root, 1958)

                                                                                  5.40

It follows from (5.39) that for every positive that satisfies the transcendental
equation (5.40), there is a characteristic function that satisfies the characteristic
equation and given as (Davenport and Root, 1958):

                                                                                  5.41
where integer       . Similarly, for         ,   , one can derive the resulting
characteristic functions as

                                                                            5.42
The steps required to determine the roots of (5.40) are summarized next. We can
rewrite (5.40) for      and       as

                                                                                5.43
Positive roots of (5.43),        , must be calculated in order to determine the even
indexed characteristic values and functions. Figure 5.2 displays functions
and       for various values of . It is observed from the figure that for the mth
root, a suitable choice for the closed path is a circle of radius           centered
at                 , as suggested in (Luck and Stevens, 2002). A straightforward
way to configure (5.43) to introduce singularities is to use the inverse of (5.43)
rearranged as follows (Luck and Stevens, 2002):

                                                                                  5.44

Applying (5.34) to (5.44) results in an explicit expression for the mth root. This
expression can be evaluated by calculating a pair of adjacently indexed DFT
coefficients (coefficients of two adjacent harmonics), as described in Section
5.3.1, or by using a numerical integration method. Therefore, by setting
            ,       of (5.33) for this case is defined as:
                                                                                  5.45



where            . Hence, the location of the mth root is explicitly defined as

                                                                                  5.46




Figure 5.2 Functions         and      for various values of     where        ,
     , and       .

5.3.3 Eigenanalysis of a Discrete AR(1) Process
In this section, derivations of (5.27), (5.28), and (5.29) are given in detail. For a
a discrete random signal (process),        , a discrete Karhunen–Loeve (K-L) series
expansion is given as follows (Akansu and Haddad, 1992):
                                                                                 5.47


where     and    are the independent discrete variables;

                                                                              5.48
is the autocorrelation function of the random signal; is the kth eigenvalue;
and        is the corresponding kth eigenfunction. The autocorrelation function of
the stationary discrete AR(1) process is given as (Papoulis, 1991):

                                                                                 5.49
Hence, the discrete K-L series expansion for an AR(1) process, from (5.47) and
(5.49), is stated as follows

                                                                                 5.50


In order to eliminate the magnitude operator, (5.50) can be rewritten in the form

                                                                                 5.51


It follows from the continuous case presented in Section 5.3.2 that the general
solution for the kth eigenvector is given as (Davenport and Root, 1958; Van
Trees, 2001):

                                                                                 5.52
where    and    are arbitrary constants; is the independent continuous variable;
             ; and          . The eigenfunction given in (5.52) is shifted by
and sampled at         ,              , where              . Accordingly, the
sampled eigenfunction is written as

                                                                                 5.53
The solution to (5.50) exists only when           . In the following discussions,
the case for        is considered given the fact that the sister case for         is
similar. For       , it follows from (5.53) that
                                                                              5.54

By substituting (5.54) in (5.51) and defining a new independent discrete variable
                 , (5.50) can be rewritten as follows:

                                                                              5.55



                                                                              5.56

The first summation on the left in (5.55) is rewritten as

                                                                              5.57


Using the fact that

                                                                              5.58


and following simple derivation steps, it can be shown that (5.57), hence the first
summation on the left in (5.55), is equal to

                                                                              5.59

Similarly, the second summation on the left in (5.55) is equal to

                                                                              5.60

where

                                                                              5.61
for both (5.59) and (5.60). It is possible to express   on the right-hand side of
(5.55) in terms of and        by taking the discrete K-L expansion given in (5.50)
into the frequency domain via DTFT as follows:

                                                                               5.62
where        is the power spectral density (PSD) of the discrete AR(1) process
and expressed as

                                                                               5.63

      is the DTFT operator (Akansu and Haddad, 1992). The Fourier transform
of the eigenfunction in (5.54) is calculated as

                                                                               5.64


where            is an impulse function of frequency located at    . By
substituting (5.63) and (5.64) into (5.62), is derived as

                                                                               5.65

Equation (5.65) shows that the eigenvalues are the samples of the PSD given in
(5.63). Moreover, (5.28) and (5.65) are identical. By substituting (5.59), (5.60),
and (5.65) in (5.51), one can show that

                                                                               5.66

Using trigonometric identities, the relationship between     and    in (5.66) is
rewritten as follows

                                                                               5.67

Similarly, for the case of        , following the same procedure, the relationship
between      and is shown as

                                                                               5.68
Finally, from (5.67) and (5.68), it is observed that     are the positive roots of the
equation

                                                                                   5.69

Using trigonometric identities, (5.69) can be rewritten as

                                                                                   5.70

which is the same transcendental equation expressed in (5.29). The roots          of
the transcendental tangent equation in (5.70) are required in the KLT kernel
expressed in (5.27). There are well-known numerical methods like the secant
method (Allen and Isaacson, 1997) to approximate roots of the equation given in
(5.70) in order to solve it implicitly rather than explicitly. A method to find
explicit solutions to the roots of transcendental equations, including (5.70), is
revisited next. That method leads to an explicit definition of KLT kernel given in
(5.27) for an AR(1) process.

5.3.4 Fast Derivation of KLT Kernel for an AR(1) Process
In this section, the fast derivation method of KLT kernel for a discrete AR(1)
process is explained. Moreover, a step-by-step implementation of the technique
is presented.

5.3.4.1 Discrete AR(1) Process
In order to define an explicit expression for the discrete KLT kernel of (5.27),
first, one must find     positive roots of the following two transcendental
equations:

                                                                                   5.71


                                                                                   5.72

as discussed in Section 5.3.3. In both equations,      is the transform size and

                                                                                   5.73
where is the first-order correlation coefficient of the AR(1) process. Roots of
(5.71) and (5.72) correspond to the even and odd indexed eigenvalues and
eigenvectors, respectively. Figure 5.3 displays functions           and
            for       and various values of . It is apparent from the figure that
for the mth root of (5.72), a suitable choice for the closed path in (5.31) is a
circle of radius

                                                                                   5.74

centered at                     , where               . It is worth noting that for
positively correlated signals,         , the ratio given in (5.73) is always greater
than 1,      . However, for negatively correlated signals,               , the ratio is
between 0 and 1 (i.e.,         ). Therefore, for        , the last two roots must be
smaller than the rest as

                                                                                   5.75

Similar to the continuous case, (5.72) is reconfigured and the poles of the
following inverse function are calculated

                                                                                   5.76
Figure 5.3 Functions          and                 for the AR(1) process with
and various values of , where           ,          ,       , and
,        .
By setting            , the function        of (5.33) for this case is defined as

                                                                                    5.77



where           . Hence, the mth root is located at

                                                                                    5.78


The procedure is the same as finding the roots of (5.71) with the exceptions that
(5.77) must be modified as follows:
                                                                               5.79

and a suitable choice for the closed path   is a circle of radius
centered at

                                                                               5.80

which can be determined by generating a plot similar to the ones in Figures 5.2
and 5.3.
Finally, the steps to derive an explicit KLT kernel of dimension for an
arbitrary discrete dataset by employing an AR(1) approximation are summarized
as follows
   1. Estimate the first-order correlation coefficient of an AR(1) model for the
   given dataset         as

                                                                               5.81

   where     is the index of random variables (or discrete-time) and            .
   2. Calculate the positive roots      of the polynomial given in (5.29) by
   substituting (5.77) and (5.79) into (5.78) for odd and even values of ,
   respectively, and use the following indexing:

                                                                               5.82

   3. Plug in the values of and        in (5.28) and (5.27) to calculate the
   eigenvalues     and eigenvectors, respectively.
MATLABTM code for steps 2 and 3 with DFT (FFT) used in solving (5.78) are
provided in (Torun and Akansu, 2013).
The computational cost of deriving KLT matrix for an arbitrary signal source has
two distinct components: the calculation of the first-order correlation coefficient
   for the given signal set, and the calculation of the roots    of (5.29) that are
plugged in (5.27) to generate the resulting transform matrix       . The roots
of the transcendental tangent equation (5.29), calculated by using (5.78), as a
function of and for           are displayed in Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4 The roots of the transcendental tangent equation 5.29,    , as a
function of for        .
The computational cost of generating KLT kernel for the given statistics by
using the method presented in this section (    ) is compared with a widely
used numerical algorithm called divide and conquer (D&Q) (Golub and Loan,
1996).
Computation times (in seconds) to generate           and        (DFT sizes of
                 ) for the case of       and                are displayed in
Figure 5.5. Both computations are performed by using one thread on a single
processor. The machine used for the simulations has an Intel® CoreTM i5-520M
CPU and 8 GB of RAM. It is displayed in the figure that the explicit KLT kernel
derivation method significantly outperforms the D&Q algorithm for larger
values of . Furthermore, it has a so-called embarrassingly parallel nature.
Hence, it can be easily computed on multiple threads and processors for any .
Therefore, by implementing it on a parallel device such as a GPU and FPGA, its
speed can be significantly improved.
Figure 5.5 Computation time, in seconds, to calculate           and         for an
AR(1) process with        , and different values of (                  ) and
               (Torun and Akansu, 2013).


5.4 Sparsity of Eigen Subspace
The sparse representation of signals has been of great research interest in signal
processing and other disciplines. KLT has been one of the most popular
mathematical tools employed in multivariate data processing and dimension
reduction. The application-specific interpretation of eigenvectors with
eigenvalues and their vector components is often a critical task (Cadima and
Jolliffe, 1995; d'Aspremont et al., 2007; Trendafilov et al., 2003; Zou et al.,
2006). Moreover, small but nonzero loadings (elements) of each principal
component (PC) (or eigenvector) bring implementation cost that is hard to
justify in applications such as generation and maintenance (rebalancing) of
eigenportfolios with a large number of financial instruments (d'Aspremont et al.,
2007; Torun et al., 2011). This and other data-intensive applications that utilize
loading coefficients have motivated researchers to study the sparsity of PCs in
eigenanalysis of measured covariance matrices. Furthermore, unevenness of
signal energy distributed among PCs in eigen subspace is reflected in
eigenvalues (coefficient variances) that lead to dimension reduction. The latter is
the very foundation of transform coding successfully used in visual signal
processing and data compression (Akansu and Haddad, 1992; Clarke, 1985;
Jayant and Noll, 1984). Therefore, both dimension reduction and sparsity of
basis functions (vectors) are significant attributes of orthogonal transforms
widely utilized in many fields. This recent development has paved the way for
the development of several popular methods for sparse eigen subspace. A rate-
distortion-based framework to sparse subspaces is presented in this section. The
challenge is to maximize explained variance (eigenvalue) by a minimum number
of PCs, also called energy compaction (dimension reduction), while replacing
the less significant samples (loading coefficients) of basis functions with zero to
achieve the desired level of sparsity (cardinality reduction) in representation.

5.4.1 Overview of Sparsity Methods
We provide an overview of the recent literature on sparsity in this subsection for
readers with more interest on the subject. Regularization methods have been
used to make an ill-conditioned matrix invertible or to prevent overfitting
(Bertero and Boccacci, 1998; Engl et al., 1996). More recently, regularization
methods also have been utilized for sparsity. regularizer leads to a sparse
solution. On the other hand, it makes the optimization problem nonconvex.
Eigenfiltering is another popular method employed for regularization (Bertero
and Boccacci, 1998; Engl et al., 1996).      regularizer, so-called lasso, is widely
used as an approximation (convex relaxation) of regularizer (Tibshirani,
1996; Trendafilov et al., 2003). Another -based method was proposed in
(Brodie et al., 2009) for sparse portfolios. SCoTLASS (Trendafilov et al., 2003)
and SPCA (Zou et al., 2006) utilize the and         regularizers for sparse
approximation to PCs, respectively.
The sparse PCA is modeled in (Trendafilov et al., 2003; Zou et al., 2006) as an
explained variance maximization problem where the number of nonzero
elements in the PCs is considered as a basis design constraint. These methods
suffer from potentially being stuck in local minima due to the nonconvex nature
of the optimization. A convex relaxation method called SDP relaxations for
sparse PCA (DSPCA) using semidefinite programming (SDP) was proposed to
deal with a simpler optimization (d'Aspremont et al., 2007). Empirical
performance results for certain cases indicate that DSPCA may generate sparse
PCs that preserve slightly more explained variance than SCoTLASS
(Trendafilov et al., 2003) and SPCA (Zou et al., 2006) for the same sparsity
level. A nonnegative variant of the sparse PCA problem, which forces the
elements of each PC to be nonnegative, is introduced in Zass and Shashua
(2006). Nonnegative sparse PCA (NSPCA) offers competitive performance to
SCoTLASS, SPCA, and DSPCA in terms of explained variance for a given
sparsity. However, signs of the PC elements bear specific information for the
applications of interests such as eigenportfolios. Thus, NSPCA is not applicable
for all types of applications. Another lasso-based approach, so-called sparse
PCA via regularized SVD (sPCA–rSVD), is proposed in Shen and Huang
(2008). Simulation results for certain cases show that sPCA–rSVD provides
competitive results to SPCA. A variation of sPCA–rSVD, so-called sparse
principal components (SPCs), that utilizes the penalized matrix decomposition
(PMD) is proposed in Witten et al. (2009). PMD that computes the rank K
approximation of a given matrix is proposed in Witten et al. (2009). It utilizes
the lasso penalty for sparsity. Unfortunately, none of these methods result in
guaranteed sparsity regardless of their prohibitive computational cost. Moreover,
the lack of mathematical framework to measure distortion, or explained variance
loss, for a desired sparsity level makes sparse PCA methods of this kind quite ad
hoc and difficult to use. On the other hand, the simple thresholding technique is
easy to implement (Cadima and Jolliffe, 1995). It performs better than
SCoTLASS and slightly worse than SPCA (Zou et al., 2006). Although simple
thresholding is easy to implement, it may cause unexpected distortion levels as
variance loss. Soft thresholding (ST) is another technique that is utilized for
sparse representation in Zou et al., (2006). Certain experiments show that ST
offers slightly better performance than simple thresholding (Zou et al., 2006).
Therefore, threshold selection plays a central role in sparsity performance.
In this section, we present in detail a subspace sparsing framework based on the
rate-distortion theory (Akansu and Haddad, 1992; Berger, 2003; Lloyd, 1982;
Max, 1960). It may be considered as an extension of the simple or soft
thresholding method to combine a sparse representation problem with an optimal
quantization method used in the source coding field (Akansu and Haddad, 1992;
Berger, 2003; Cadima and Jolliffe, 1995; Clarke, 1985; Jayant and Noll, 1984).
The method employs a varying-size midtread (zero-zone) probability density
function (pdf)-optimized (Lloyd–Max) quantizer designed for a component
histogram of each eigenvector (or the entire eigenmatrix) to achieve the desired
level of distortion (sparsity) in the subspace with reduced cardinality (Hajnal,
1983; Lloyd, 1982; Max, 1960; Sriperumbudur et al., 2009). Herein, we focus
specifically on eigen subspace of a discrete AR(1) process with closed–form
expressions for its eigenvectors and eigenvalues as derived earlier in the chapter.
It is known that the AR(1) process approximates well many real-world signals
(Akansu and Haddad, 1992). We also sparse eigenportfolios of the NASDAQ-
100 index by using this method. Note that the method to sparse a subspace
through quantization of its basis functions is a marked departure from the
traditional transform coding where transform coefficients, in the subspace, are
quantized for dimension reduction (Akansu and Haddad, 1992; Clarke, 1985;
Jayant and Noll, 1984). Therefore, we investigate the trade-off between subspace
orthogonality and sparsity from a rate-distortion perspective. Then, we provide a
comparative performance of the presented method along with the various
methods reported in the literature, such as ST (Zou et al., 2006), SPCA (Zou et
al., 2006), DSPCA (d'Aspremont et al., 2007), and SPC (Witten et al., 2009),
with respect to the metrics of nonsparsity (NS) and variance loss (VL).

5.4.2 pdf-Optimized Midtread Quantizer
Quantizers may be categorized as midrise and midtread (Jayant and Noll, 1984).
A midtread quantizer is preferred for applications requiring entropy reduction
and noise filtering (or sparsity) simultaneously (Gonzales and Akansu, 1997). In
this section, we utilize a midtread type to quantize basis function (vector)
samples (components) of a transform (subspace) to achieve sparse representation
in the signal domain.
A celebrated design method to calculate optimum intervals (bins) and
representation (quanta) values of a quantizer for the given input signal pdf, a so-
called pdf-optimized quantizer, was independently proposed by Max and Lloyd
(Lloyd, 1982; Max, 1960). It assumes a random information source X with zero-
mean and a known pdf function        . Then, it minimizes quantization error inthe
mean squared error (mse) sense and also makes sure that all bins of a quantizer
have the same level of error. The quantization error of an L-bin pdf-optimized
quantizer is expressed as follows:

                                                                               5.83


where quantizer bin intervals, , and quanta values, , are calculated
iteratively. The necessary conditions for an mse-based pdf-optimized quantizer
are given as (Lloyd, 1982; Max, 1960):

                                                                               5.84




leading to the optimal unequal intervals and resulting quanta values as
leading to the optimal unequal intervals and resulting quanta values as

                                                                               5.85


                                                                               5.86


where               and            . A sufficient condition to avoid local optimum
in (5.84) is the log-concavity of the pdf function      . The log-concave property
holds for uniform, Gaussian, and Laplacian pdf types (Jayant and Noll, 1984).
The representation point (quantum) of a bin in such a quantizer is its centroid
that minimizes the quantization noise for the interval. We are interested in pdf-
optimized quantizers with an adjustable zero-zone, odd L, or midtread quantizer,
to sparse (quantize) eigenvectors of an eigen subspace. One can adjust zero-
zone(s) of the quantizer(s) to achieve the desired level of sparsity in a transform
matrix with the trade-off of resulting imperfectness in orthogonality and
explained variance. We will present design examples by using the presented
technique to sparse subspaces in Section 5.4.3.
The discrepancy between input and output of a quantizer is measured by the
signal-to-quantization-noise ratio (SQNR) (Berger, 2003)

                                                                               5.87


where is the variance of an input with zero-mean and known pdf type, and is
expressed as

                                                                               5.88

The first-order entropy (rate) of the output for an L-level quantizer with such an
input is calculated as (Berger, 2003; Brusewitz, 1986)

                                                                               5.89
Rate-distortion theory states that the quantization error variance is expressed as
(Berger, 2003):

                                                                               5.90
where             and the number of quantizer levels found as         . The
parameter , also called the fudge factor, depends on the pdf type of the
information source.
The optimum allocation of the total bits Ramong multiple information sources
(transform coefficients in transform coding (TC)) is an important task in lossy
compression. Transform coefficient variances        (or eigenvalues ) are quite
uneven to achieve dimension reduction in TC. Therefore, an optimum bit
allocation algorithm assigns bit rate    for quantization of coefficient in such
a way that the resulting quantization errors for all coefficients are forced to be
equal,                       (Akansu and Haddad, 1992). The number of levels
for the     quantizer, for coefficient , is found as          . Optimally allocated
bits     among multiple sources for the total bit budget R,with the assumption
that all sources have the same pdf type, are calculated as (Akansu and Haddad,
1992)

                                                                               5.91


where              .

5.4.3 Quantization of Eigen Subspace
In TC, sparsity in transform coefficients is desired. In contrast, any sparse
transform including KLT aims to sparse subspace (transform matrix) where basis
vector components are interpreted as loading coefficients in some applications
(Akansu and Torun, 2012; Bollen and Whaley, 2009; Choi and Varian, 2012;
Mamaysky et al., 2008; Ohlson and Rosenberg, 1982; Torun and Akansu, 2013).
Quantization of a given subspace with an optimally designed single quantizer,
, or a set of quantizers    , is defined as

                                                                               5.92
In this case,  is a pdf-optimized midtread quantizer designed for the entire
transform matrix. Then, transform coefficients are obtained by using the
quantized matrix

                                                                              5.93
Unlike in TC, coefficients are not quantized in sparse representation methods.
Instead, transform coefficients of the quantized subspace for a given signal
vector are obtained. As in TC, quantization error equals to reconstruction error,
both in mse. Mean-squared quantization error is expressed as

                                                                               5.94


where              .

5.4.4 pdf of Eigenvector
We model the probability density of eigenvector components in order to design
pdf-optimized quantizers to sparse them. Each eigenvector of an AR(1) process
is generated by a sinusoidal function as expressed in (5.27). The pdf, with
arbitrary support, of a continuous sinusoidal function is modeled as
(Balakrishnan and Nevzorov, 2004; Hejn et al., 1998):

                                                                               5.95

where a and b define the support,            . The cumulative distribution function
(cdf) of such a function type is of arcsine distribution and expressed as

                                                                               5.96


Mean and variance of the arcsine distribution are calculated as

                                                                               5.97


                                                                               5.98

The pdf of arcsine distribution is symmetric and U-shaped. The arcsine
distribution with       and       , namely standard arcsine distribution, is a
special case of the beta distribution with the parameters            . Figure 5.6
shows the pdf of arcsine distribution with parameters                  and        .
Log-concavity of a pdf        is the sufficient condition for the uniqueness of a
pdf-optimized quantizer. However, arcsine distribution type has the log-convex
property (Bagnoli and Bergstrom, 2005). It is stated in Yee (2010) that for
exponential sources and the sources with strictly log convex pdfs, the quantizer
intervals (bins) and their bin representation (quanta) values are globally optimum
and unique. Therefore, pdf-optimized quantizers can be designed for arcsine
distribution (Lloyd, 1982; Max, 1960). The second principal component, , of
an AR(1) source for           and size of           is shown to be fit by arcsine
distribution with              and              , respectively. Minimum and
maximum valued components of the kth eigenvector depend on , , and as
stated in (5.27). In order to maintain equal distortion levels among quantizers to
sparse eigenvectors, we calculated optimal intervals for zero-zones of pdf-
optimized midtread quantizers. Thus, most of the small valued eigenvector
components are likely to be quantized as zero.




Figure 5.6 Probability density function of arcsine distribution for
and            . Loadings of a second PC for an AR(1) signal source with
and          are fitted to arcsine distribution by finding minimum and maximum
values in the PC.
Figure 5.7a and Figure 5.7b display the normalized histograms of the first and
second eigenvector components (PC1 and PC2 loading coefficients) for an
AR(1) process with         and           . The value of N is selected large
enough to generate proper histograms. The intervals of the histograms, , are
set as
                                                                            5.99

where      is the kth eigenvector. The dashed lines in each normalized histogram
show the probability that is calculated by integrating the pdf of arcsine
distribution in (5.95) for each bin interval. The histogram displayed in Figure
5.7a has only one side of the arcsine pdf, as expected from (5.27). In contrast,
Figure 5.7b displays the histogram with a complete arcsine pdf shape. These
figures confirm the arcsine distribution type for eigenvector components of an
AR(1) process.




Figure 5.7 Normalized histograms of (a) PC1 and (b) PC2 loadings for an AR(1)
signal source with         and           . The dashed lines in each histogram
show the probability that is calculated by integrating an arcsine pdf for each bin
interval.
Now, we investigate the rate-distortion performance of an arcsine pdf-optimized
zero-zone quantizer. Rate of quantizer output is calculated by using first-order
entropy as defined in (5.89). Distortion caused by the quantizer is calculated in
mse and represented in SQNR as defined in (5.87). Figure 5.8 displays rate-
distortion performance of such a quantizer with         . In this figure, distortion
level is increased by increasing the zero-zone of the quantizer for more sparsity
where rate decreases accordingly. One can design a quantizer with zero-zone for
each eigenvector (PC) or for the entire eigenmatrix to achieve the desired level
of matrix sparsity (Lloyd, 1982; Max, 1960).




Figure 5.8 Rate (bits)-distortion (SQNR) performance of zero mean and unit
variance arcsine pdf-optimized quantizer for      bins. The distortion level is
increased by combining multiple bins around zero in a larger zero-zone.

5.4.5 Sparse KLT Method
In this subsection, we present in detail a simple method to sparse eigen subspace
for an AR(1) process through a design example. The relevant parameter values
for the sparse KLT (SKLT) example considered are tabulated in Table 5.1. The
steps of design are summarized as follows.
   1. First-order correlation coefficient is calculated from the available
   dataset as described in (5.81), and    is constructed. Assume that           for
   the given example with           .
   2. Eigenvalues       and corresponding eigenvectors        of    are
   calculated from (5.28) and (5.27), respectively. Eigenvalues of the first 16
   eigenvectors (PCs) are listed in Table 5.1. These eigenvectors explain
   68.28% of the total variance. Values of       used to calculate each
   eigenvalue and corresponding eigenvector are also shown in Table 5.1. Note
   that      of (5.24) and the explained variance used in Table 5.1 measure
   energy compaction efficiency of a subspace.
   3. PC loading coefficients (eigenvector components) are fitted to arcsine
   distribution by calculating                   and                 . Then,
   variances                   , are calculated by using (5.98). Table 5.1 also
   tabulates     ,     , and       of eigenvectors.
   4. For a given total rate R (desired level of sparsity),     are calculated by
   plugging        in the optimum bit allocation equation given in (5.91). Then,
   quantizer levels       are calculated as               and rounded up to the
   closest odd integer number. R is the sparsity tuning parameter of SKLT. As
   in all of the sparse PCA methods, R for a given sparsity has to be determined
   with cross-validation. Table 5.1 displays calculated rates and quantizer levels
   for the total rate of       .
   5. For this design example, a         level pdf-optimized zero-zone quantizer
   of arcsine distribution with zero mean and unit variance is used as the
   starting point. Then, several adjacent bins around zero are combined to
   adjust the zero-zone for the desired sparsity level. For the kth eigenvector, a
   predesigned          level pdf-optimized the zero-zone quantizer is converted
   to an         level zero-zone quantizer.
   6. PC loadings (eigenvector components) are normalized to have zero mean
   and unit variance,                      , where mean and std are the mean
   and standard deviation of eigenvector components, respectively. Quantized
   (sparsed) eigenvectors are generated by applying quantization on
   eigenvectors of the original eigen subspace                . The number of
   zero components or sparsity level (S) of quantized PCs for this example are
   also given in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1 Relevant parameter values of SKLT example for the first 16 PCs of an
AR(1) source with       and          . They explain 68.28% of the total
variance
                                  a       b              R     L S
          PC1    0.0114 18.77 −0.0853 0.0853 0.0036 5.6546 51 26
          PC2    0.0229 18.14 −0.0853 0.0853 0.0036 5.6563 51 28
          PC3    0.0344 17.17 −0.0856 0.0856 0.0037 5.6588 51 40
          PC4    0.0459 15.97 −0.0857 0.0857 0.0037 5.6620 51 34
          PC5 0.0575 14.64 −0.0860 0.0860 0.0037 5.6655 51 36
          PC6 0.0691 13.29 −0.0862 0.0862 0.0037 5.6691 51 38
          PC7 0.0808 11.97 −0.0864 0.0864 0.0037 5.6725 51 42
          PC8 0.0925 10.73 −0.0866 0.0866 0.0037 5.6754 51 42
          PC9 0.1043 9.60 −0.0868 0.0868 0.0038 5.6790 51 40
          PC10 0.1162 8.58 −0.0869 0.0869 0.0038 5.6819 51 36
          PC11 0.1281 7.67 −0.0871 0.0870 0.0038 5.6835 51 44
          PC12 0.1400 6.88 −0.0872 0.0872 0.0038 5.6866 53 36
          PC13 0.1520 6.17 −0.0873 0.0873 0.0038 5.6881 53 36
          PC14 0.1640 5.56 −0.0874 0.0874 0.0038 5.6902 53 36
          PC15 0.1760 5.02 −0.0875 0.0875 0.0038 5.6915 53 36
          PC16 0.1881 4.55 −0.0876 0.0876 0.0038 5.6930 53 36


 Remark 5.1
 The number of bins for a predesigned pdf-optimized quantizer is selected
 based on the quantization noise and implementation cost. The increase in
 signal-to-quantization noise (SQNR) of a pdf-optimized zero-zone quantizer
 optimized for arcsine pdf with       is found not to be that significant.

Sparsity achieved by quantization of PCs leads to orthogonality imperfectness.
We present orthogonality imperfectness in mse with respect to allowable total
rate R (desired sparsity level) for various AR(1) sources defined as

                                                                         5.100
where is the         identity matrix; and           .
Figure 5.9 displays the trade-off between subspace sparsity and loss of
orthogonality for various AR(1) sources and          . It is observed from Figure
5.9 that the orthogonality imperfectness decreases almost linearly with
increasing R, as expected.




Figure 5.9 Orthogonality imperfectness-rate (sparsity) trade-off for sparse eigen
subspaces of three AR(1) sources with         .

5.4.6 Sparsity Performance
Let us compare performances of the presented SKLT method with the ST (Zou
et al., 2006), SPCA (Zou et al., 2006), DSPCA (d'Aspremont et al., 2007), and
SPC (d'Aspremont et al., 2007) methods for the AR(1) process, and also for an
empirical correlation matrix of stock returns in the NASDAQ-100 index in this
subsection. In order to provide a fair comparison, sparsity levels of all methods
considered here are tuned in such a way that compared PCs have almost the
same number of nonzero components. In most cases, the number of nonzero
components of each PC in the SKLT method are kept slightly lower than the
others in order to show the method's merit under mildly disadvantageous test
conditions.

5.4.6.1 Eigen Subspace Sparsity for the AR(1) Process
The sparsity imposed on PCs may degrade the explained variance described in
d'Aspremont et al. (2007). The explained variances of the PCs are calculated as
                     , where     is the kth eigenvector for a given . For the
sparsed PCs, new explained variances (eigenvalues) are calculated as
                       , where     is the kth sparse eigenvector. Then, the
percentage of explained variance loss (VL) as a performance metric is defined as
                     . Similarly, the cumulative explained variance loss of first L
PCs is defined as                        . In addition, we also used a nonsparsity
(NS) performance metric for comparison. It is defined as the percentage of
nonzero components in a given sparsed eigenvector. Thus, the performance is
measured as the variance loss for the given NS level (d'Aspremont et al., 2007;
Zou and Hastie, 2005; Zou et al., 2006). We are unable to provide their
comparative rate-distortion performance due to the lack of models to generate
sparse PCs for all methods reported here.
Figure 5.10a displays the VL measurements of sparsed first PCs generated by
SKLT, SPCA, SPC, ST, and DSPCA methods with respect to NS for an AR(1)
source with         and          . For SKLT, an         level quantizer optimized
for arcsine pdf with zero mean and unit variance is used as the initial quantizer.
The zero-zone width of the initial quantizer is adjusted for required sparsity, as
explained in this chapter. Then, the generated quantizer is employed. Figure
5.10a shows that SKLT offers less variance loss than the other methods. SPCA
provides competitive performance to SKLT. Figure 5.10b displays NS and VL
performance comparisons of sparse PCs generated by SKLT and by SPCA for
the same AR(1) process. The original eigenvectors that explain 90% of the total
variance are selected for sparsity comparison. Figure 5.10b shows that the VL
performance of SKLT is slightly better than that of SPCA. Note that the NS of
SKLT is slightly lower than that of SPCA in this comparison.
Figure 5.10 (a) Variance loss (VL) measurements of sparsed first PCs generated
by SKLT, SPCA, SPC, ST, and DSPCA methods with respect to nonsparsity
(NS) for an AR(1) source with        and       ; (b) NS and VL
measurements of sparsed eigenvectors for an AR(1) source with         and
        generated by the SKLT method and SPCA algorithm.

5.4.6.2 Eigen Subspace Sparsity for the NASDAQ-100 Index
We present an example to sparse an eigen subspace that leads to the creation of
the corresponding sparse eigenportfolios (Akansu and Torun, 2015).
Eigendecomposition of empirical correlation matrices is a popular mathematical
tool in finance employed for various tasks including eigenfiltering of
measurement noise and creation of eigenportfolios for baskets of stocks (Akansu
and Torun, 2012; Markowitz, 1959; Torun et al., 2011). An empirical correlation
matrix for the end-of-day (EOD) stock returns for the NASDAQ-100 index with
        -day time window ending on April 9, 2014, is measured (Torun et al.,
2011). The vector of 100 stock returns in the NASDAQ-100 index at time is
created as (Akansu and Torun, 2012):

                                                                              5.101
The empirical correlation matrix of returns at time    is expressed as

                                                                              5.102




where the matrix elements




represent measured pairwise correlations for an observation window of
samples. The returns are normalized to be zero mean and unit variance, and
is a real, symmetric, and positive definite matrix. Now, we introduce
eigendecomposition of       as follows:

                                                                              5.103


where          are eigenvalue–eigenvector pairs (Akansu and Torun, 2012).
The component values of eigenvector            are repurposed as the capital
allocation coefficients to create the kth eigenportfolio for a group of stocks
where the resulting coefficients        are pairwise uncorrelated. These
coefficients represent eigenportfolio returns. Eigenportfolios are used in various
investment and trading strategies (Chamberlain and Rothschild, 1983). It is
required to buy and sell certain stocks in the amounts defined by the loading
(capital allocation) coefficients in order to build and rebalance eigenportfolios in
time for the targeted risk levels. Some of the loading coefficients may have
relatively small values where their trading cost becomes a practical concern for
portfolio managers. Therefore, sparsing eigen subspace of an empirical
correlation matrix        may offer cost reductions in desired trading activity. In
contrast, although theoretically appealing, the optimization algorithms like
SPCA, DSPCA, and SPC with constraints for forced sparsity (cardinality
reduction of a set) may substantially alter intrinsic structures of original
eigenportfolios. Therefore, such a sparse representation might cause a significant
deviation from the measured empirical correlation matrix. Hence, the use of
eigenportfolios generated by a sparsity-constrained optimization in a trading
strategy may lead to poor performance.
For simplicity, a single quantizer in the SKLT method is utilized to sparse the
entire eigenmatrix       . It is optimized for the histogram of its elements as
displayed in Figure 5.11. It is observed to be a Gaussian pdf. Figure 5.12
displays the VL measurements of sparsed first PCs generated by SKLT, SPCA,
SPC, ST, and DSPCA methods with respect to NS. It is shown that SKLT offers
less variance loss than other methods considered in this chapter. Figure 5.13
displays the cumulative explained variance loss with           generated daily from
an empirical correlation matrix of EOD returns between April 9, 2014, and May
22, 2014, for 100 stocks in the NASDAQ-100 index by using KLT, SKLT,
SPCA, and ST methods. The measurement window of the last 30 days,                 ,
is used. NS levels of 85%, 80%, and 75% for each PC are forced in experiments
as displayed in Figure 5.13a, Figure 5.13b, and Figure 5.13c, respectively. The
SKLT method consistently outperforms the others for this time-varying scenario.
Figure 5.11 Normalized histogram of eigenmatrix elements for an empirical
correlation matrix of end-of-day (EOD) returns for 100 stocks in the NASDAQ-
100 index.         -day measurement window ending on April 9, 2014.




Figure 5.12 VL measurements of sparsed first PCs generated by SKLT, SPCA,
SPC, ST, and DSPCA methods with respect to NS for an empirical correlation
matrix of EOD returns for 100 stocks in the NASDAQ-100 index with         -
day measurement window ending on April 9, 2014.
Figure 5.13 Cumulative explained variance loss with        generated daily
from an empirical correlation matrix of EOD returns between April 9, 2014, and
May 22, 2014, for 100 stocks in the NASDAQ-100 index by using KLT, SKLT,
SPCA, and ST methods. NS levels of 85%, 80%, and 75% for all PCs are forced
in (a), (b), and (c), respectively, using   days.
The difference between the original       and the modified correlation matrix
      due to sparsed eigenvectors is defined as

                                                                           5.104

where      is the norm-2 of a matrix. Hence, the distance between the original
and the sparsed eigenmatrices is expressed as

                                                                           5.105

Figure 5.14a and Figure 5.14b display the     and of sparse eigen subspaces
generated daily from an empirical correlation matrix of EOD returns between
April 9, 2014, and May 22, 2014, for 100 stocks in the NASDAQ-100 index by
using SKLT, SPCA, and ST methods, respectively. The NS level of 85% for all
PCs is forced with         days. These performance measures highlight that the
SKLT method sparses eigen subspace of the NASDAQ-100 index better than the
SPCA and ST methods. Moreover, the SKLT does not force an alteration of the
actual covariance structure like other methods.
Figure 5.14 (a)     and (b) of sparse eigen subspaces generated daily from an
empirical correlation matrix of EOD returns between April 9, 2014, and May 22,
2014, for 100 stocks in the NASDAQ-100 index by using SKLT, SPCA, and ST
methods, respectively. NS level of 85% for all PCs is forced with       days.

5.5 Conclusions
Closed-form expressions for KLT kernel (eigenvectors) and corresponding
transform coefficient variances (eigenvalues) of the AR(1) process were reported
in the literature (Ray and Driver, 1970). However, they require solving a
transcendental tangent equation (5.29). Mathematical steps leading to equations
(5.27), (5.28), and (5.29) are discussed in detail, following the methodology used
for a continuous stochastic process with exponential autocorrelation function
(Davenport and Root, 1958; Pugachev, 1959a,b; Wilkinson, 1965). Then, a
simple and fast method to find the roots of a transcendental equation is
employed to derive the roots of (5.29)explicitly. That derivation made it possible
to express the        KLT kernel and corresponding coefficient variances in
explicit form, leading to extremely fast KLT implementations for processes that
can be modeled with AR(1) process. The technique is shown to be more efficient
than the D&Q algorithm (Golub and Loan, 1996).
The constrained optimization algorithms to generate sparse PCs do not guarantee
a good performance for an arbitrary covariance matrix due to the nonconvex
nature of the problem. The SKLT method to sparse subspaces is presented in this
chapter. It utilizes the mathematical framework developed for transform coding
in rate-distortion theory. The sparsity performance comparisons demonstrate the
superiority of SKLT over the popular algorithms known in the literature.

References
Akansu, A.N. and Haddad, R.A. (1992). Multiresolution signal decomposition:
transforms, subbands, and wavelets. New York: Academic Press.
Akansu, A.N. and Torun, M.U. (2012). Toeplitz approximation to empirical
correlation matrix of asset returns: a signal processing perspective. Journal of
Selected Topics in Signal Processing, 6 (4), 319–326.
Akansu, A.N. and Torun, M.U. (2015). A primer for financial engineering:
financial signal processing and electronic trading. New York: Academic Press-
Elsevier.
Allen, M. and Isaacson, E. (1997). Numerical analysis for applied science. New
York: John Wiley & Sons.
Atal, B. and Hanauer, S. (1971). Speech analysis and synthesis by linear
prediction of the speech wave. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
50, 637.
Bagnoli, M. and Bergstrom, T. (2005). Log-concave probability and its
applications. Economic Theory, 26 (2), 445–469.
Balakrishnan, N. and Nevzorov, V.B. (2004). A primer on statistical
distributions. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Berger, T. (2003). Rate-distortion theory. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.
Bertero, M. and Boccacci, P. (1998). Introduction to inverse problems in
imaging. London: Institute of Physics Publishing.
Bollen, N.P.B. and Whaley, R.E. (2009). Hedge fund risk dynamics:
implications for performance appraisal. The Journal of Finance, 64 (2), 985–
1035.
Brodie, J., Daubechies, I., De Mol, C., Giannone D. and Loris, I. (2009). Sparse
and stable Markowitz portfolios. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 106 (30), 12267–12272.
Brown, J. and Churchill, R. (2009). Complex variables and applications. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Brusewitz, H. (1986). Quantization with entropy constraint and bounds to the
rate distortion function, ser. Trita-TTT. Telecommunication Theory, Electrical
Engineering, 8605, 28–29.
Cadima, J. and Jolliffe, I.T. (1995). Loading and correlations in the
interpretation of principle components. Journal of Applied Statistics, 22 (2),
203–214.
Chamberlain, G. and Rothschild, M. (1983) Arbitrage, factor structure and
mean-variance analysis on large asset markets. Econometrica, 51 (5), 1281–
1304.
Choi, H. and Varian, H. (2012). Predicting the present with Google Trends.
Economic Record, 88, 2–9.
Clarke, R.J. (1985). Transform coding of images. New York: Academic Press.
d'Aspremont, A. El Ghaoui, L. Jordan, M.I. and Lanckriet, G.R.G. (2007). A
direct formulation for sparse PCA using semidefinite programming. SIAM
Review, 49 (3), 434–448.
Davenport, W.B. and Root, W.L. (1958). An introduction to the theory of
random signals and noise. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Doob, J. (1942). The Brownian movement and stochastic equations. Annals of
Mathematics, 43 (2), 351–369.
Engl, H.W. Hanke, M. and Neubauer, A. (1996). Regularization of inverse
problems. New York: Kluwer Academic.
Golub, G.H. and Loan, C.F.V. (1996). Matrix computations. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press.
Gonzales, C. and Akansu, A.N. (1997). A very efficient low-bit-rate subband
image/video codec using shift-only PR-QMF and zero-zone linear quantizers.
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing, 4, 2993–2996.
Hajnal, A. and Juhasz, I. (1983). Remarks on the cardinality of compact spaces
and their Lindelof subspaces. Proceedings of the American Mathematical
Society, 51 (5), 146–148.
Hejn, K., Pacut, A. and Kramarski, L. (1998). The effective resolution
measurements in scope of sine-fit test. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation
and Measurement, 47 (1), 45–50.
Jayant, N.S. and Noll, P. (1984). Digital coding of waveforms: principles and
applications to speech and video. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall
Professional Technical Reference.
Jolliffe, I.T. (2002). Principal component analysis. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Kay, S. (1988). Modern spectral estimation: theory and application. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Lloyd, S. (1982). Least squares quantization in PCM. IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory, 28 (2), 129–137.
Luck, R. and Stevens, J. (2002). Explicit solutions for transcendental equations.
SIAM Review, 44, 227–233.
Mamaysky, H. Spiegel, M. and Zhang, H. (2008). Estimating the dynamics of
mutual fund alphas and betas. Review of Financial Studies, 21, 233–264.
Markowitz, H.M. (1959). Portfolio selection: efficient diversification of
investments. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Max, J. (1960). Quantizing for minimum distortion. IRE Transactions on
Information Theory, 6 (1), 7–12.
Ohlson, J. and Rosenberg, B. (1982). Systematic risk of the CRSP equal-
weighted common stock index: a history estimated by stochastic-parameter
regression. The Journal of Business, 55 (1), 121–145.
Papoulis, A. (1991). Probability, random variables, and stochastic processes.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Pugachev, V. (1959a). A method for the determination of the eigenvalues and
eigenfunctions of a certain class of linear integral equations. Journal of Applied
Mathematics and Mechanics (translation of the Russian journal Prikladnaya
Matematika i Mekhanika), 23 (3), 527–533.
Pugachev, V. (1959b). A method of solving the basic integral equation of
statistical theory of optimum systems in finite form. Journal of Applied
Mathematics and Mechanics (translation of the Russian journal Prikladnaya
Matematika i Mekhanika), 23 (1), 3–14.
Ray, W. and Driver, R. (1970). Further decomposition of the Karhunen-Loeve
series representation of a stationary random process. IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory, 16 (6), 663–668.
Shen, H. and Huang, J.Z. (2008). Sparse principal component analysis via
regularized low rank matrix approximation. Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 99
(6), 1015–1034.
Sriperumbudur, B.K. Torres, D.A. and Lanckriet, G.R.G. The sparse eigenvalue
problem. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?
doi=10.1.1.243.8515&rep=rep1&type=pdf
Strang, G. (1986). Introduction to applied mathematics. Wellesley, MA:
Wellesley-Cambridge Press.
Tibshirani, R. (1996). Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 58, 267–288.
Torun, M.U. and Akansu, A.N. (2013). An efficient method to derive explicit
KLT kernel for first-order autoregressive discrete process. IEEE Transactions on
Signal Processing, 61 (15), 3944–3953.
Torun, M.U., Akansu, A.N. and Avellaneda, M. (2011). Portfolio risk in
multiple frequencies. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, Special Issue on Signal
Processing for Financial Applications, 28 (5), 61–71.
Trendafilov, N. Jolliffe, I.T. and Uddin, M. (2003). A modified principal
component technique based on the LASSO. Journal of Computational and
Graphical Statistics, 12, 531–547.
Uhlenbeck, G. and Ornstein, L. (1930). On the theory of the Brownian motion.
Physical Review, 36, 823–841.
Van Trees, H.L. (2001). Detection, estimation, and modulation theory. New
York: John Wiley & Sons.
Wilkinson, J. (1965). The algebraic eigenvalue problem. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Witten, D.M. Tibshirani, R. and Hastie, T. (2009). A penalized matrix
decomposition, with applications to sparse principal components and canonical
correlation analysis. Biostatistics, 10 (3), 515.
Yee, V.B. (2010). Studies on the asymptotic behavior of parameters in optimal
scalar quantization. Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Michigan.
Zass, R. and Shashua, A. (2006). Nonnegative sparse PCA. In Advances in
neural information processing systems (ed. Scholkopf, B., Platt, J. and Hoffman,
T.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1561–1568.
Zou, H. and Hastie, T. (2005). Regularization and variable selection via the
elastic net. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical
Methodology), 67 (2), 301–320.
Zou, H. Hastie, T. and Tibshirani, R. (2006). Sparse principal component
analysis. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 15, 262–286.
Chapter 6
Approaches to High-Dimensional Covariance
and Precision Matrix Estimations
   Jianqing Fan1, Yuan Liao2 and Han Liu3
   1Bendheim Center for Finance, Princeton University, USA
   2Department of Mathematics, University of Maryland, USA
   3Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton

   University, USA

6.1 Introduction
Large covariance and precision (inverse covariance) matrix estimations have
become fundamental problems in multivariate analysis that find applications in
many fields, ranging from economics and finance to biology, social networks,
and health sciences. When the dimension of the covariance matrix is large, the
estimation problem is generally challenging. It is well-known that the sample
covariance based on the observed data is singular when the dimension is larger
than the sample size. In addition, the aggregation of a huge amount of estimation
errors can make considerable adverse impacts on the estimation's accuracy.
Therefore, estimating large covariance and precision matrices has attracted
rapidly growing research attention in the past decade. Many regularized methods
have been developed: see Bickel and Levina (2008), El Karoui (2008), Friedman
et al. (2008), Fryzlewicz (2013), Han et al. (2012), Lam and Fan (2009), Ledoit
and Wolf (2003), Pourahmadi (2013), Ravikumar et al., (2011b), Xue and Zou
(2012), among others.
One of the commonly used approaches to estimating large matrices is to assume
the covariance matrix to be sparse, that is, many off-diagonal components are
either zero or nearly so. This effectively reduces the total number of parameters
to estimate. However, such a sparsity assumption is restrictive in many
applications. For example, financial returns depend on the common risk factors,
housing prices depend on the economic health, and gene expressions can be
stimulated by cytokines. Moreover, in many applications, it is more natural to
assume that the precision matrix is sparse instead (e.g., in Gaussian graphical
models).
In this chapter, we introduce several recent developments for estimating large
covariance and precision matrices without assuming the covariance matrix to be
sparse. One of the selected approaches assumes the precision matrix to be sparse
and applies column-wise penalization for estimations. This method efficiently
estimates the precision matrix in Gaussian graphical models. The other method
is based on high-dimensional factor analysis. Both methods will be discussed in
Sections 6.2 and 6.3, and are computationally more efficient than the existing
ones based on penalized maximum likelihood estimation. We present several
applications of these methods, including graph estimation for gene expression
data, and several financial applications. In particular, we shall see that estimating
covariance matrices of high-dimensional asset excess returns plays a central role
in applications of portfolio allocations and in risk management.
In Section 6.4, we provide a detailed description of the so-called factor pricing
model, which is one of the most fundamental results in finance. It postulates how
financial returns are related to market risks, and has many important practical
applications, including portfolio selection, fund performance evaluation, and
corporate budgeting. In the model, the excess returns can be represented by a
factor model. We shall also study a problem of testing “mean–variance
efficiency.” In such a testing problem, most of the existing methods are based on
the Wald statistic, which has two main difficulties when the number of assets is
large. First, the Wald statistic depends on estimating a large inverse covariance
matrix, which is a challenging problem in a data-rich environment. Second, it
suffers from a lower power in a high-dimensional, low-sample-size situation. To
address the problem, we introduce a new test, called the power enhancement
test, which aims to enhance the power of the usual Wald test.
In Section 6.5, we will present recent developments of efficient estimations in
panel data models. As we shall illustrate, the usual principal components method
for estimating the factor models is not statistically efficient since it treats the
idiosyncratic errors as both cross-sectionally independent and homoscedastic. In
contrast, using a consistent high-dimensional precision covariance estimator can
potentially improve the estimation efficiency. We shall conclude in Section 6.6.
Throughout the chapter, we shall use         and      as the operator and
Frobenius norms of a matrix . We use          to denote the Euclidean norm of a
vector .

6.2 Covariance Estimation via Factor Analysis
Suppose we observe a set of stationary data         , where each
is a high-dimensional vector; here, and respectively denote the sample size
and the dimension. We aim to estimate the covariance matrix of :               ,
and its inverse     , which are assumed to be independent of . This section
introduces a method of estimating and its inverse via factor analysis. In many
applications, the cross-sectional units often depend on a few common factors.
Fan et al. (2008) tackled the covariance estimation problem by considering the
following factor model:

                                                                                 6.1
where      is the observed response for the th (              ) individual at time
            ; is a vector of factor loadings; is a           vector of common
factors; and      is the error term, usually called idiosyncratic component,
uncorrelated with . In fact, factor analysis has long been employed in financial
studies, where       often represents the excess returns of the th asset (or stock)
on time . The literature includes, for instance, Campbell et al. (1997),
Chamberlain and Rothschild (1983), Fama and French (1992). It is also
commonly used in macroeconomics for forecasting diffusion indices (e.g., Stock
and Watson, (2002).
The factor model (6.1) can be put in a matrix form as

                                                                                 6.2
where                and                . We are interested in , the
covariance matrix of , and its inverse       , which are assumed to be time-
invariant. Under model (6.1), is given by

                                                                                 6.3
where                 is the covariance matrix of . Estimating the covariance
matrix     of the idiosyncratic components        is also important for statistical
inferences. For example, it is needed for large sample inference of the unknown
factors and their loadings and for testing the capital asset pricing model
(Sentana, 2009).
In the decomposition (6.3), it is natural to consider the conditional sparsity:
given the common factors, most of the remaining outcomes are mutually weakly
correlated. This gives rise to the approximate factor model (e.g., Chamberlain
and Rothschild, 1983), in which       is a sparse covariance but not necessarily
diagonal, and for some          ,

                                                                               6.4

does not grow too fast as    . When        ,        measures the maximum
number of non zero components in each row.
We would like to emphasize that model (6.3) is related to but different from the
problem recently studied in the literature on “low-rank plus sparse
representation”. In fact, the “low rank plus sparse” representation of (6.3) holds
on the population covariance matrix, whereas the model considered by Candès et
al. (2011) and Chandrasekaran et al. (2010) considered such a representation on
the data matrix. As there is no to estimate, their goal is limited to producing a
low-rank plus sparse matrix decomposition of the data matrix, which
corresponds to the identifiability issue of our study, and does not involve
estimation or inference. In contrast, our ultimate goal is to estimate the
population covariance matrices as well as the precision matrices. Our
consistency result on      demonstrates that the decomposition (6.3) is
identifiable, and hence our results also shed the light of the “surprising
phenomenon” of Candès et al. (2011) that one can separate fully a sparse matrix
from a low-rank matrix when only the sum of these two components is available.
Moreover, note that in financial applications, the common factors are
sometimes known, as in Fama and French (1992). In other applications,
however, the common factors may be unknown and need to be inferred.
Interestingly, asymptotic analysis shows that as the dimensionality grows fast
enough (relative to the sample size), the effect of estimating the unknown factors
is negligible, and the covariance matrices of and and their inverses can be
estimated as if the factors were known (Fan et al., 2013).
We now divide our discussions into two cases: models with known factors and
models with unknown factors.

6.2.1 Known Factors
When the factors are observable, one can estimate     by the ordinary least
squares (OLS):               , where,
The residuals are obtained using the plug-in method:                .
Denote by                  . We then construct the residual covariance matrix as:




Now we apply thresholding on      . Define

                                                                                 6.5

where      is a generalized shrinkage function of Antoniadis and Fan (2001),
employed by Rothman et al. (2009) and Cai and Liu (2011), and            is an
entry-dependent threshold. In particular, the hard-thresholding rule
                  (Bickel and Levina, 2008) and the constant thresholding
parameter         are allowed. In practice, it is more desirable to have be
entry-adaptive. An example of the threshold is

                                                                                 6.6
This corresponds to applying the thresholding with parameter    to the
correlation matrix of . Cai and Liu (2011) discussed an alternative type of
“adaptive threshold.” Moreover, we take     to be: some      ,




which is a proper threshold level to overrides the estimation errors.
The covariance matrix          can be estimated by the sample covariance matrix



where                , and is a -dimensional column vector of ones.
Therefore, we obtain a substitution estimator (Fan et al., 2011):

                                                                                 6.7
By the Sherman–Morrison–Woodbury formula,



which is estimated by
which is estimated by

                                                                               6.8

6.2.2 Unknown Factors
When factors are unknown, Fan et al. (2013) proposed a nonparametric
estimator of based on the principal component analysis. Let
be the ordered eigenvalues of the sample covariance matrix of and
be their corresponding eigenvectors. Then the sample covariance has the
following spectral decomposition:




where                   is called the principal orthogonal complement, and is
the number of common factors. We can apply thresholding on        as in (6.5) and
(6.6). Denote the thresholded      by . Note that the threshold value in (6.6)
now becomes, for some




The estimator of   is then defined as:

                                                                               6.9


This estimator is called the principal orthogonal complement thresholding
(POET) estimator. It is obtained by thresholding the remaining components of
the sample covariance matrix, after taking out the first principal components.
One of the attractiveness of POET is that it is optimization-free, and hence is
computationally appealing.
The POET (6.9) has an equivalent representation using a constrained least-
squares method. The least-squares method seeks for                and
             such that

                                                                             6.10
subject to the normalization

                                                                                  6.11


Putting it in a matrix form, the optimization problem can be written as

                                                                                  6.12


where                   and                    . For each given , the least-squares
estimator of is               , using the constraint (6.11) on the factors.
Substituting this into (6.12), the objective function now becomes
                                         . The minimizer is now clear: the columns
of        are the eigenvectors corresponding to the largest eigenvalues of the
      matrix       and               (see e.g., Stock and Watson, 2002). The
residual is given by                , based on which we can construct the sample
covariance matrix of . Then apply the thresholding to obtain . The
covariance of is then estimated by                 . It can be proved that the
estimator in (6.9) satisfies:



Several methods have been proposed to consistently estimate the number of
factors. For instance, Bai and Ng (2002) proposed to use:

                                                                                  6.13


where is a prescribed upper bound. The literature also includes, Ahn and
Horenstein (2013), Alessi et al. (2010), Hallin and Liška (2007), Kapetanios
(2010), among others. Numerical studies in Fan et al. (2013) showed that the
covariance estimator is robust to overestimating . Therefore, in practice, we
can also choose a relatively large number for . Consistency can still be
guaranteed.

6.2.3 Choosing the Threshold
Recall that the threshold value     depends on a user-specific constant    . In
practice, we need to choose to maintain the positive definiteness of the
estimated covariances for any given finite sample. To do so, write the error
covariance estimator as      , which depends on via the threshold. We choose
   in the range where            . Define

                                                                               6.14
When is sufficiently large, the estimator becomes diagonal, while its
minimum eigenvalue must retain strictly positive. Thus,         is well defined and
for all        ,       is positive definite under finite sample. We can obtain
by solving                       . We can also approximate        by plotting
           as a function of , as illustrated in Figure 6.1. In practice, we can
choose in the range                  for a small and large enough . Choosing
the threshold in a range to guarantee the finite-sample positive definiteness has
also been previously suggested by Fryzlewicz (2013).




Figure 6.1 Minimum eigenvalue of          as a function of     for three choices of
thresholding rules. Adapted from Fan et al. (2013).

6.2.4 Asymptotic Results
Under regularity conditions (e.g., strong mixing, exponential-tail distributions),
Fan et al. (2011, 2013) showed that for the error covariance estimator, assuming
             ,



and



Here         quantifies the level of sparsity as defined in (6.4), and   is given
by: for some     , when factors are known,




when factors are unknown,




The dimension     is allowed to grow exponentially fast in    .
As for the convergence of , because the first eigenvalues of grow with ,
one can hardly estimate with satisfactory accuracy in either the operator norm
or the Frobenius norm. This problem arises not from the limitation of any
estimation method, but due to the nature of the high-dimensional factor model.
We illustrate this in the following example.


  Example 6.1
  Consider a simplified case where we know                 for each
            ,       , and      are observable. Then when estimating      , we
  only need to estimate       using the sample covariance matrix           , and
  obtain an estimator for :



  Simple calculations yield to
  where     denotes the -dimensional column vector of ones with
              . Therefore, due to the central limit theorem employed on
                            ,            is asymptotically normal. Hence
           diverges if         , even for such a simplified toy model.

As we have seen from the above example, the small error of estimating
is substantially amplified due to the presence of       ; the latter in fact
determines the size of the largest eigenvalue of . We further illustrate this
phenomenon in the following example.


  Example 6.2
  Consider an ideal case where we know the spectrum except for the first
  eigenvector of . Let             be the eigenvalues and vectors, and assume
  that the largest eigenvalue          for some     . Let be the estimated
  first eigenvector, and define the covariance estimator                      .
  Assume that is a good estimator in the sense that                        .
  However,



  which can diverge when             .

On the other hand, we can estimate the precision matrix with a satisfactory rate
under the operator norm. The intuition follows from the fact that     has
bounded eigenvalues. Let      denote the inverse of the POET estimator. Fan et
al. (2013) showed that     has the same rate of convergence as that of     .
Specifically,



Comparing the rates of convergence of known and unknown factors, we see that
when the common factors are unobservable, the rate of convergence has an
additional term          , coming from the impact of estimating the unknown
factors. This impact vanishes when              , in which case the minimax rate
as in Cai and Zhou (2010) is achieved. As increases, more information about
the common factors is collected, which results in more accurate estimation of the
common factors         . Then the rates of convergence in both observable factor
and unobservable factor cases are the same.

6.2.5 A Numerical Illustration
We now illustrate the above theoretical results by using a simple three-factor
model with a sparse error covariance matrix. The distribution of the data-
generating process is taken from Fan et al. (2013) (Section 6.7). Specifically, we
simulated from a standard Fama–French three-factor model. The factor loadings
are drawn from a trivariate normal distribution                             , and
   follows a vector autoregression of the first order (VAR(1)) model
                   . To make the simulation more realistic, model parameters are
calibrated from the real data on annualized returns of 100 industrial portfolios,
obtained from the website of Kenneth French. As there are three common
factors, the largest three eigenvalues of are of the same order as
                 , which are approximately        , and grow linearly with .

Table 6.1 Mean and covariance matrix used to generate


                       0.0047 0.0767              0.0087
                       0.0007              0.0841 0.0013
                              0.0087       0.0013 0.1649

Table 6.2 Parameters of     generating process


                  1.0037 0.0011               0.0468 0.1413
           0.0335 0.0011 0.9999 0.0042               0.0646
                         0.0042 0.9973 0.0195
We generate a sparse covariance matrix     of the form:            . Here, is
the error correlation matrix, and is the diagonal matrix of the standard
deviations of the errors. We set                 , where each is generated
independently from a gamma distribution         , and and are chosen to
match the sample mean and sample standard deviation of the standard deviations
of the errors. The off-diagonal entries of    are generated independently from a
normal distribution, with mean and standard deviation equal to the sample mean
and sample standard deviation of the sample correlations among the estimated
residuals. We then employ hard thresholding to make sparse, where the
threshold is found as the smallest constant that provides the positive definiteness
of .
For the simulation, we fix         , and let increase from 20 to 600 in
increments of 20. We plot the averages and standard deviations of the distance
from and to the true covariance matrix , under the norm
                         (recall that denotes the sample covariance). It is easy
to see that



which resembles the relative errors. We also plot the means and standard
deviations of the distances from       and     to     under the spectral norm. Due
to invertibility, the operator norm for    is plotted only up to         .
We observe that the unobservable factor model performs just as well as the
estimator if the factors are known. The cost of not knowing the factors is
negligible when is large enough. As we can see from Figure 6.2, the impact
decreases quickly. In addition, when estimating      , it is hard to distinguish the
estimators with known and unknown factors, whose performances are quite
stable compared to that of the sample covariance matrix. Intuitively, as the
dimension increases, more information about the common factors becomes
available, which helps infer the unknown factors. Indeed, as is shown in Bai
(2003) and Fan et al. (2014a), the principal components method can estimate the
unknown factors at a rate of:




Hence, as long as    is relatively large,   can be estimated pretty accurately.
Figure 6.2 Averages of                        (left panel) and             (right
panel) with known factors (solid red curve), unknown factors (solid blue curve),
and sample covariance (dashed curve) over 200 simulations, as a function of the
dimensionality . Taken from Fan et al. (2013).

6.3 Precision Matrix Estimation and Graphical
Models
Let            be data points from an -dimensional random vector
                with              . We denote the precision matrix           and
define an undirected graph            based on the sparsity pattern of : let
               be the node set corresponding to the variables in , an edge
         if and only        .
As we will explain in Section 6.3.1, the graph describes the conditional
independence relationships between            : that is, letting
                       , then is independent of given            if and only if
       .
In high-dimensional settings where        , we assume that many entries of
are zero (or, in other words, the graph is sparse). The problem of estimating a
large sparse precision matrix is called covariance selection (Dempster, 1972).

6.3.1 Column-wise Precision Matrix Estimation
A natural approach for estimating is by penalizing the likelihood using the -
penalty (Banerjee et al., 2008; Friedman et al., 2008; Yuan and Lin, 2007). To
further reduce the estimation bias, Jalali et al. (2012), Lam and Fan (2009), Shen
et al., (2012) propose either greedy algorithms or nonconvex penalties for sparse
precision matrix estimation. Under certain conditions, Ravikumar et al. (2011a),
Rothman et al. (2008), Wainwright (2009), Zhao and Yu (2006), Zou (2006),
study the theoretical properties of the penalized likelihood methods.
Another approach is to estimate in a column-by-column fashion. For this,
Yuan (2010) and Cai et al. (2011) propose the graphical Dantzig selector and
CLIME, respectively, which can be solved by linear programming. More
recently, Liu and Luo (2012) and Sun and Zhang (2012) have proposed the
SCIO and scaled-lasso methods. Compared to the penalized likelihood methods,
the column-by-column estimation methods are computationally simpler and are
more amenable to theoretical analysis.
In the rest of this chapter, we explain the main ideas of the column-by-column
precision matrix estimation methods. We start with an introduction of notations.
Letting                         and     be the indicator function, for       , we
define
Let          be a symmetric matrix and              be two sets. Denote by
     the submatrix of with rows and columns indexed by and . Letting
be the column of and          be the submatrix of with the column
removed. We define the following matrix norms:




We also denote          and          to be the largest and smallest eigenvalues of
 .
The column-by-column precision matrix estimation method exploits the
relationship between conditional distribution of multivariate Gaussian and linear
regression. More specifically, letting            , the conditional distribution of
   given      satisfies



Let                           and                            . We have

                                                                               6.15
where               is independent of     . By the block matrix inversion formula,
we have

                                                                               6.16

                                                                               6.17
Therefore, we can recover in a column-by-column manner by regressing on
    for             . For example, let           be the data matrix. We denote
by                           . Meinshausen and Bühlmann (2006) propose to
estimate each   by solving the lasso regression:
where is a tuning parameter. Once is given, we get the neighborhood edges
by reading out the nonzero coefficients of . The final graph estimate is
obtained by either the “AND” or “OR” rule on combining the neighborhoods for
all the nodes. However, the neighborhood pursuit method of Meinshausen and
Bühlmann (2006) only estimates the graph but cannot estimate the inverse
covariance matrix .
To estimate   , Yuan (2010) proposes to estimate     by solving the Dantzig
selector:



where              is the sample covariance matrix and is a tuning parameter.
Once is given, we can estimate by                                  . We then
get the estimator of by plugging         and into (6.16) and (6.17). Yuan
(2010) analyzes the -norm error             and shows its minimax optimality
over certain model space.
In another work, Sun and Zhang (2012) propose to estimate      and    by solving
a scaled-lasso problem:




Once is obtained,            . Sun and Zhang (2012) provide the spectral-norm
rate of convergence of the obtained precision matrix estimator.
Cai et al. (2011) proposes the CLIME estimator, which directly estimates the th
column of by solving



where is the th canonical vector and is a tuning parameter. This
optimization problem can be formulated into a linear program and has the
potential to scale to large problems. In a closely related work of CLIME, Liu and
Luo (2012) propose the SCIO estimator, which solves the th column of by




The SCIO estimator can be solved efficiently by the pathwise coordinate descent
The SCIO estimator can be solved efficiently by the pathwise coordinate descent
algorithm.

6.3.2 The Need for Tuning-insensitive Procedures
Most of the methods described in Section 6.3.1 require choosing some tuning
parameters that control the bias–variance tradeoff. Their theoretical justifications
are usually built on some theoretical choices of tuning parameters that cannot be
implemented in practice. For example, in the neighborhood pursuit method and
the graphical Dantzig selector, the tuning parameter and depend on ,
which is unknown. The tuning parameters of the CLIME and SCIO depend on
     , which is unknown.
Choosing the regularization parameter in a data-dependent way remains an open
problem. Popular techniques include the -statistic, AIC (Akaike information
criterion), BIC (Bayesian information criterion), extended BIC (Chen and Chen,
2008, 2012; Foygel and Drton, 2010), RIC (risk inflation criterion; Foster and
George, 1994), cross validation, and covariance penalization (Efron, 2004). Most
of these methods require data splitting and have been only justified for low-
dimensional settings. Some progress has been made recently on developing
likelihood-free regularization selection techniques, including permutation
methods (Boos et al., 2009; Lysen, 2009; Wu et al., 2007) and subsampling
methods (Bach, 2008; Ben-david et al., 2006; Lange et al., 2004; Meinshausen
and Bühlmann, 2010). Meinshausen and Bühlmann (2010), Bach (2008), and
Liu et al. (2012) also propose to select the tuning parameters using subsampling.
However, these subsampling-based methods are computationally expensive and
still lack theoretical guarantees.
To handle the challenge of tuning parameter selection, we introduce a “tuning-
insensitive” procedure for estimating the precision matrix of high-dimensional
Gaussian graphical models. Our method, named TIGER (tuning-insensitive
graph estimation and regression), is asymptotically tuning-free and only requires
very few efforts to choose the regularization parameter in finite sample settings.

6.3.3 TIGER: A Tuning-insensitive Approach for Optimal
Precision Matrix Estimation
The main idea of the TIGER method is to estimate the precision matrix in a
column-by-column fashion. For each column, the computation is reduced to a
sparse regression problem. This idea has been adopted by many methods
described in Section 6.3.1. These methods differ from each other mainly by how
they solve the sparse regression subproblem. Unlike these existing methods,
TIGER solves this sparse regression problem using the SQRT-lasso (Belloni et
al., 2012).
The SQRT-lasso is a penalized optimization algorithm for solving high-
dimensional linear regression problems. For a linear regression problem
           , where        is the response,           is the design matrix,
is the vector of unknown coefficients, and        is the noise vector. The SQRT-
lasso estimates by solving




where is the tuning parameter. It is shown in Belloni et al. (2012) that the
choice of for the SQRT-lasso method is asymptotically universal and does not
depend on any unknown parameter. In contrast, most other methods, including
the lasso and Dantzig selector, rely heavily on a known standard deviation of the
noise. Moreover, the SQRT-lasso method achieves near oracle performance for
the estimation of .
In Liu and Wang (2012), they show that the objective function of the scaled-
lasso can be viewed as a variational upper bound of the SQRT-lasso. Thus, the
TIGER method is essentially equivalent to the method in Sun and Zhang (2012).
However, the SQRT-lasso is more amenable to theoretical analysis and allows us
to simultaneously establish optimal rates of convergence for the precision matrix
estimation under many different norms.
Let             be an -dimensional diagonal matrix with the diagonal elements
the same as those in . Conditioned on the observed data         , we define



By (6.15), we have

                                                                             6.18
We define



Therefore, we have
                                                                              6.19
We define to be the sample correlation matrix:                              .
Motivated by the model in (6.19), we propose the following precision matrix
estimator.




For the estimator in (6.20), is a tuning parameter. In Section 6.3.4, we show
that by choosing             , the obtained estimator achieves the optimal rates
of convergence in the asymptotic setting. Therefore, the TIGER procedure is
asymptotically tuning free. For finite samples, we set

                                                                              6.22

with chosen from a range            . Since the choice of does not depend on
any unknown parameters, we call the procedure tuning-insensitive. Practically,
we found that simply setting     gives satisfactory finite sample performance
in most applications.
If a symmetric precision matrix estimate is preferred, we conduct the following
correction:                  for all     . Another symmetrization method is




As has been shown by Cai et al. (2011), if is a good estimator, then will
also be a good estimator: they achieve the same rates of convergence in the
asymptotic settings.
Let          be the normalized data matrix, that is,              for              .
An equivalent form of (6.20) and (6.21) is
                                                                               6.23


                                                                               6.24

Once is estimated, we can also estimate the graph               based on the
sparsity pattern of   .

6.3.4 Computation
Instead of directly solving (6.20) and (6.21), we consider the following
optimization:

                                                                               6.25


Liu and Wang (2012) show that the solution to (6.20) and (6.21) is the same as
that to (6.25). Equation (6.25) is jointly convex with respect to  and and can
be solved by a coordinate-descent procedure. In the th iteration, for a given  ,
we first solve a subproblem




This is a lasso problem and can be efficiently solved by the coordinate-descent
algorithm developed by Friedman et al. (2007). Once          is obtained, we can
calculate       as



We iterate these two steps until the algorithm converges.

6.3.5 Theoretical Properties of TIGER
Liu and Wang (2012) establish the rates of convergence of the TIGER estimator
  to the true precision matrix under different norms. In particular, let
                    and                   . Under the assumption that the
condition number of is bounded by a constant, they establish the element-wise
sup-norm rate of convergence:

                                                                             6.26


Under mild conditions, the obtained rate in (6.26) is minimax optimal over the
model class consisting of precision matrices with bounded condition numbers.
Let     be the indicator function and                  be the number of nonzero
off-diagonal elements of . The result in (6.26) implies that the Frobenious
norm error between and satisfies:

                                                                             6.27


The rate in (6.27) is the minimax optimal rate for the Frobenious norm error in
the same model class consisting of precision matrices with bounded condition
numbers.
Let      be the largest eigenvalue of (i.e.,     is the spectral norm of    ) and
                     . Liu and Wang (2010) also show that

                                                                             6.28


This spectral norm rate in (6.28) is also minimax optimal over the same model
class as before.

6.3.6 Applications to Modeling Stock Returns
We apply the TIGER method to explore a stock price dataset collected from
Yahoo! Finance (finance.yahoo.com). More specifically, the daily closing prices
were obtained for 452 stocks that were consistently in the S&P 500 index
between January 1, 2003, through January 1, 2011. This gives us altogether 2015
data points, and each data point corresponds to the vector of closing prices on a
trading day. With     denoting the closing price of stock on day , we consider
the log-return variable                   and build graphs over the indices .
We Winsorize (or truncate) every stock so that its data points are within six
times the mean absolute deviation from the sample average. In Figure 6.3, we
show boxplots for 10 randomly chosen stocks. We see that the data contain
outlier even after Winsorization; the reasons for these outliers include splits in a
stock, which increase the number of shares. It is known that the log-return data
are heavy-tailed. To suitably apply the TIGER method, we Gaussianize the
marginal distribution of the data by the normal-score transformation. In Figure
6.3b, we compare the boxplots of the data before and after Gaussianization. We
see that Gaussianization alleviates the effect of outliers.
Figure 6.3 Boxplots of                     for 10 stocks. As can be seen, the
original data has many outliers, which is addressed by the normal-score
transformation on the rescaled data (right).
In this analysis, we use the subset of the data between January 1, 2003, and
January 1, 2008, before the onset of the financial crisis. The 452 stocks are
categorized into 10 Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS) sectors,
including Consumer Discretionary (70 stocks), Consumer Staples (35 stocks),
Energy (37 stocks), Financials (74 stocks), Health Care (46 stocks),
Industrials (59 stocks), Information Technology (64 stocks), Materials (29
stocks), Telecommunications Services (6 stocks), and Utilities (32 stocks).
It is expected that stocks from the same GICS sectors should tend to be clustered
together in the estimated graph, since stocks from the same GICS sector tend to
interact more with each other. In Figure 6.4, the nodes are colored according to
the GICS sector of the corresponding stock.
Figure 6.4 The estimated TIGER graph using the S&P 500 stock data from
January 1, 2003, to January 1, 2008.
In Figure 6.4 we visualize the estimated graph using the TIGER method on the
data from January 1, 2003, to January 1, 2008. There are altogether             data
points and          dimensions. Even though the TIGER procedure is
asymptotically tuning-free, Liu and Wang (2010) show that a fine-tune step can
further improve its finite sample performance. To fine-tune the tuning parameter,
we adopt a variant of the stability selection method proposed by Meinshausen
and Bühlmann (2010). As suggested in (6.22), we consider 10 equal-distance
values of chosen from a range                . We randomly sample 100 sub-
datasets, each containing                     data points. On each of these 100
subsampled datasets, we estimate a TIGER graph for each tuning parameter. In
the final graph shown in Figure 6.4, we use    , and an edge is present only if
it appears more than 80% of the time among the 100 subsampled datasets (with
all the singleton nodes removed).
From Figure 6.4, we see that stocks from the same GICS sectors are indeed close
to each other in the graph. We refrain from drawing any hard conclusions about
the effectiveness of the estimated TIGER graph—how it is used will depend on
the application. One potential application of such a graph could be for portfolio
optimization. When designing a portfolio, we may want to choose stocks with
large graph distances to minimize the investment risk.

6.3.7 Applications to Genomic Network
As discussed in this chapter, an important application of precision matrix
estimation is to estimate high-dimensional graphical models. In this section, we
apply the TIGER method on a gene expression dataset to reconstruct the
conditional independence graph of the expression levels of 39 genes.
This dataset, which includes 118 gene expression arrays from Arabidopsis
thaliana, originally appeared in Wille et al. (2004). Our analysis focuses on gene
expression from 39 genes involved in two isoprenoid metabolic pathways: 16
from the mevalonate (MVA) pathway are located in the cytoplasm, 18 from the
plastidial (MEP) pathway are located in the chloroplast, and 5 are located in the
mitochondria. While the two pathways generally operate independently,
crosstalk is known to happen (Wille et al. 2004). Our scientific goal is to recover
the gene regulatory network, with special interest in crosstalk.
We first examine whether the data actually satisfy the Gaussian distribution
assumption. In Figure 6.5, we plot the histogram and normal QQ plot of the
expression levels of a gene named MECPS. From the histogram, we see the
distribution is left-skewed compared to the Gaussian distribution. From the
normal QQ plot, we see the empirical distribution has a heavier tail compared to
Gaussian. To suitably apply the TIGER method on this dataset, we need to first
transform the data so that its distribution is closer to Gaussian. Therefore, we
Gaussianize the marginal expression values of each gene by converting them to
the corresponding normal-scores. This is automatically done by the huge.npn
function in the R package huge (Zhao et al., 2012).
Figure 6.5 The histogram and normal QQ plots of the marginal expression
levels of the gene MECPS. We see the data are not exactly Gaussian distributed.
Adapted from Liu and Wang (2012).
We apply the TIGER on the transformed data using the default tuning parameter
          . The estimated network is shown in Figure 6.6. We note that the
estimated network is very sparse with only 44 edges. Prior investigations suggest
that the connections from genes AACT1 and HMGR2 to gene MECPS indicate a
primary source of the crosstalk between the MEP and MVA pathways, and these
edges are presented in the estimated network. MECPS is clearly a hub gene for
this pathway.
Figure 6.6 The estimated gene networks of the Arabadopsis dataset. The within-
pathway edges are denoted by solid lines, and between-pathway edges are
denoted by dashed lines. From Liu and Wang (2012).
For the MEP pathway, the genes DXPS2, DXR, MCT, CMK, HDR, and MECPS
are connected as in the true metabolic pathway. Similarly, for the MVA
pathway, the genes AACT2, HMGR2, MK, MPDC1, MPDC2, FPPS1, and FPP2
are closely connected. Our analysis suggests 11 cross-pathway links. This is
consistent to previous investigation in Wille et al. (2004). This result suggests
that there might exist rich interpathway crosstalks.

6.4 Financial Applications
6.4.1 Estimating Risks of Large Portfolios
Estimating and assessing the risk of a large portfolio are important topics in
financial econometrics and risk management. The risk of a given portfolio
allocation vector      is conveniently measured by                , in which is a
volatility (covariance) matrix of the assets' returns. Often multiple portfolio risks
are of interest, and hence it is essential to estimate the volatility matrix . On the
other hand, assets' excess returns are often driven by a few common factors.
Hence can be estimated via factor analysis as described in Section 6.1.
Let       be a strictly stationary time-series of an   vector of observed asset
returns and             . We assume that satisfies an approximate factor
model:

                                                                              6.29
where is an          matrix of factor loadings; is a         vector of common
factors; and is an         vector of idiosyncratic error components. In contrast
to and , here is assumed to be fixed. The common factors may or may not
be observable. For example, Fama and French (1993) identified three known
factors that have successfully described the US stock market. In addition,
macroeconomic and financial market variables have been thought to capture
systematic risks as observable factors. On the other hand, in an empirical study,
Bai and Ng (2002) determined two unobservable factors for stocks traded on the
New York Stock Exchange during 1994–1998.
As described in Section 6.1, the factor model implies the following
decomposition of :

                                                                                6.30
In the case of observable factors, an estimator of is constructed based on
thresholding the covariance matrix of idiosyncratic errors, as in (6.7), denoted by
   . In the case of unobservable factors, can be estimated by POET as in (6.9),
denoted by       . Because , the number of factors, might also be unknown, this
estimator uses a data-driven number of factors . Based on the factor analysis,
the risk for a given portfolio    can be estimated by either             or
          , depending on whether       is observable.

6.4.1.1 Estimating a Minimum Variance Portfolio
There are also many methods proposed to choose data-dependent portfolios. For
instance, estimated portfolio vectors can arise when the ideal portfolio
depends on the inverse of the large covariance (Markowitz, 1952), by
consistently estimating     . Studying the effects of estimating is also
important for portfolio allocations. In these problems, estimation errors in
estimating can have substantial implications (see discussions in El Karoui,
2010). For illustration, consider the following example of estimating the global
minimum variance portfolio.
The global minimum variance portfolio is the solution to the problem:



where              , yielding                    . Although this portfolio does not
belong to the efficient frontier, Jagannathan and Ma (2003) showed that its
performance is comparable with those of other tangency portfolios.
The factor model yields a positive definite covariance estimator for , which
then leads to a data-dependent portfolio:




It can be shown that      is   -consistent, in the sense that



We refer to El Karoui (2010) and Ledoit and Wolf (2003) for further discussions
on the effects of estimating large covariance matrices for portfolio selections.

6.4.1.2 Statistical Inference of the Risks
Confidence intervals of the true risk       can be constructed based on the
estimated risk       , where          or , depending on whether the factors are
known or not. Fan et al. (2014a) showed that, under some regularity conditions,
respectively,




where     is an   -consistent estimator of    .
An important implication is that the asymptotic variance is the same regardless
of whether the factors are observable or not. Therefore, the impact of estimating
the unknown factors is asymptotically negligible. In addition, it can also be
shown that the asymptotic variance is slightly smaller than that of        , the
sample covariance-based risk estimator. The asymptotic variance
                    can be consistently estimated, using the heteroscedasticity
and autocorrelation consistent covariance estimator of Newey and West (1987)
based on the truncated sum of estimated autocovariance functions. Therefore, the
above limiting distributions can be employed to assess the uncertainty of the
estimated risks by, for example, constructing asymptotic confidence intervals for
           . Fan et al. (2014a) showed that the confidence interval is practically
accurate even at the finite sample.

6.4.2 Large Panel Test of Factor Pricing Models
The content of this section is adapted from the recent work by Fan et al. (2014b),
including graphs and tables. We consider a factor-pricing model, in which the
excess return has the following decomposition:

                                                                               6.31
In this subsection, we shall focus on the case in which   's are observable.
Let                be the vector of intercepts for all financial assets. The key
implication from the multifactor pricing theory is that should be zero, known
as mean-variance efficiency, for any asset . An important question is then if
such a pricing theory can be validated by empirical data, namely whether the
null hypothesis

                                                                               6.32
is consistent with empirical data.
Most of the existing tests to the problem (6.32) are based on the quadratic
statistic            , where is the OLS estimator for ,            is the estimated
inverse of the error covariance, and      is a positive number that depends on the
factors only. Prominent examples are the test given by Gibbons et al. (1989),
the GMM test in MacKinlay and Richardson (1991), and the likelihood ratio test
in Beaulieu et al. (2007), all in quadratic forms. Recently, Pesaran and Yamagata
(2012) studied the limiting theory of the normalized       assuming        were
known. They also considered a quadratic test where          is replaced with its
diagonalized matrix.
There are, however, two main challenges in the quadratic statistic . The first is
that estimating    is a challenging problem when        , as described
previously. Secondly, even though      were known, this test suffers from a
lower power in a high-dimensional-low-sample-size situation, as we now
explain.
For simplicity, let us temporarily assume that            are independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d.) Gaussian and                 is known, where
                . Under ,         is     distributed, with the critical value ,
which is of order , at significant level . The test has no power at all when
                or                 , assuming that     has bounded eigenvalues. This
is not unusual for the high-dimension-low-sample-size situation we encounter,
where there are thousands of assets to be tested over a relatively short time
period (e.g. 60 monthly data). And it is especially the case when there are only a
few significant alphas that arouse market inefficiency. By a similar argument,
this problem can not be rescued by using any genuine quadratic statistic, which
are powerful only when a non-negligible fraction of assets are mispriced. Indeed,
the factor above reflects the noise accumulation in estimating parameters
of .

6.4.2.1 High-dimensional Wald Test
Suppose     is i.i.d.         . Then as          , Pesaran and Yamagata (2012)
showed that




where                                 . This normalized Wald test is infeasible
unless     is consistently estimable. Under the sparse assumption of , this can
be achieved by thresholding estimation as previously described. Letting       be
the thresholding estimator, then a feasible high-dimensional Wald test is




With further technical arguments (see Fan et al., 2014b), it can be shown that
            . Note that it is very technically involved to show that substituting
    for     is asymptotically negligible when             .
6.4.2.2 Power Enhancement Test
Traditional tests of factor pricing models are not powerful unless there are
enough stocks that have nonvanishing alphas. Even if some individual assets are
significantly mispriced, their nontrivial contributions to the test statistic are
insufficient to reject the null hypothesis. This problem can be resolved by
introducing a power enhancement component (PEM) to the normalized Wald
statistic   . The PEM is a screening statistic, designed to detect sparse
alternatives with significant individual alphas.
Specifically, for some predetermined threshold value        , define a set

                                                                               6.33

where is the OLS estimator and                  is times the estimated
variance of , with  being the regression residuals. Denote a subvector of
by



the screened-out alpha estimators, which can be interpreted as estimated alphas
of mispriced stocks. Let    be the submatrix of     formed by the rows and
columns whose indices are in . So           is an estimated conditional
covariance matrix of , given the common factors and .
With the above notation, we define the screening statistic as

                                                                               6.34
The choice of     must suppress most of the noises, resulting in an empty set of
   under the null hypothesis. On the other hand, cannot be too large to filter
out important signals of alphas under the alternative. For this purpose, noting
that the maximum noise level is                , we let




This is a high criticism test. When        and         ,         . With this
choice of , if we define, for                               ,
                                                                              6.35

then under mild conditions,             , with some additional conditions,
           , and    behaves like                 .
The power enhancement test is then defined to be


whose detectable region is the union of those of and        . Note that under the
null hypothesis,       , so by the selection consistency,      with probability
approaching one. Thus, the null distribution of the power enhancement test is
that of    , which is standard normal. This means adding does not introduce
asymptotic size distortion. On the other hand, since      , the power of
is always enhanced. Fan et al. (2014b) showed that the test is consistent against
the alternative as any subset of:




6.4.2.3 Empirical Study
We study monthly returns on all the S&P 500 constituents from the CRSP
database for the period January 1980 to December 2012, during which a total of
1170 stocks have entered the index for our study. Testing of market efficiency is
performed on a rolling window basis: for each month from December 1984 to
December 2012. The test statistics are evaluated using the preceding 60 months'
returns         . The panel at each testing month consists of stocks without
missing observations in the past 5 years, which yields a cross-sectional
dimension much larger than the time-series dimension            . For testing
months                          , we fit the Fama–French three-factor (FF-3)
model:

                                                                              6.36
for           and                 , where    represents the return for stock at
month ; is the risk-free rate; and             , and       constitute the FF-3
model's market, size, and value factors.
Table 6.3 summarizes descriptive statistics for different components and
estimates in the model. On average, 618 stocks (which is more than 500 because
we are recording stocks that have ever become the constituents of the index)
enter the panel of the regression during each 5-year estimation window, of which
5.5 stocks are selected by . The threshold                                is about
0.45 on average, which changes as the panel size changes for every window
of estimation. The selected stocks have much larger alphas than other stocks do,
as expected. As far as the signs of those alpha estimates are concerned,            of
all the estimated alphas are positive, and         of all the selected alphas are
positive. This indicates that market inefficiency is primarily contributed by
stocks with extra returns, instead of a large portion of stocks with small alphas,
demonstrating the sparse alternatives. In addition, we notice that the -values of
the thresholded Wald test       is generally smaller than that of the test     given
by Pesaran and Yamagata (2012).
Table 6.3 Variable descriptive statistics for the Fama–French three-factor model
(Adapted from Fan et al., 2014b)
                Variables      Mean Std dev. Median Min            Max
                               617.70 26.31   621   574            665
                                5.49   5.48    4     0              37
                               0.9973 0.1630 0.9322 0.7899 1.3897
                               4.3003 0.9274 4.1056 1.7303 8.1299
              -value of     0.2844 0.2998 0.1811            0     0.9946
              -value of     0.1861 0.2947 0.0150            0     0.9926
              -value of PEM 0.1256 0.2602 0.0003            0     0.9836
We plot the running -values of ,            , and the PEM test (augmented from
) from December 1984 to December 2012. We also add the dynamics of the
percentage of selected stocks (         ) to the plot, as shown in Figure 6.7. There
is a strong negative correlation between the stock selection percentage and the
-values of these tests. This shows that the degree of market efficiency is
influenced not only by the aggregation of alphas, but also by those extreme ones.
We also observe that the -value line of the PEM test lies beneath those of
and      tests as a result of enhanced power, and hence it captures several
important market disruptions ignored by the latter two (e.g. Black Monday in
1987, collapse of the Japanese bubble in late 1990, and the European sovereign
debt crisis after 2010). Indeed, the null hypothesis of market efficiency is
rejected by the PEM test at the      level during almost all financial crises,
including major financial crises such as Black Wednesday in 1992, the Asian
financial crisis in 1997, and the financial crisis in 2008, which are also detected
by     and       tests. For    ,     , and      of the study period, ,      , and the
PEM test conclude that the market is inefficient, respectively. The histograms of
the -values of the three test statistics are displayed in Figure 6.8.




Figure 6.7 Dynamics of p-values and selected stocks ( , from Fan et al.,
2014b).




Figure 6.8 Histograms of -values for         ,   , and PEM (from Fan et al.,
2014b).
6.5 Statistical Inference in Panel Data Models
6.5.1 Efficient Estimation in Pure Factor Models
The sparse covariance estimation can also be employed to improve the
estimation efficiency in factor models. Consider:


In the model, only is observable. In most literature, the factors and loadings
are estimated via the principal components (PC) method, which solves a
constraint minimization problem:




subject to some identifiability constraints so that the solution is unique. The PC
method does not incorporate the error covariance , hence it essentially treats
the error terms as cross-sectionally homoscedastic and uncorrelated. It is well
known that under either cross-sectional heteroscedasticity or correlations, the PC
method is not efficient. On the other hand, when        is assumed to be sparse and
estimated via thresholding, we can incorporate this covariance estimator into the
estimation, and improve the estimation efficiency.

6.5.1.1 Weighted Principal Components
We can estimate the factors and loadings via the weighted least squares. For
some       positive definite weight matrix , solve the following optimization
problem:




subject to:




Here, can be either stochastic or deterministic. When      is stochastic, it can
be understood as a consistent estimator of some deterministic matrix.
Solving the constrained optimization problem gives the WPC estimators: and
   are both        vectors such that the columns of the        matrix
                          are the eigenvectors corresponding to the largest
eigenvalues of         , and                         . This method is called
weighted principal components (WPC; see Bai and Liao, 2013), to distinguish
from the traditional PC method that uses          . Note that PC does not encounter
the problem of estimating large covariance matrices, and is not efficient when
     's are cross-sectionally correlated across .
Bai and Liao (2013) studied the inferential theory of the WPC estimators. In
particular, they showed that for the estimated common component, as                ,

                                                                                   37


with                           and                           , where




and                      , assumed to exist. Note that although the factors and
loadings are not individually identifiable,   can consistently estimate the
common component         , without introducing a rotational transformation.

6.5.1.2 Optimal Weight Matrix
There are three interesting choices for the weight matrix . The most
commonly seen weight is the identity matrix, which leads to the regular PC
estimator. The second choice of the weight matrix takes        diag
                         . The third choice is the optimal weight. Note that the
asymptotic variance of the estimated common component in (37) depends on
only through



It is straightforward to show that when            , the asymptotic variance is
minimized, that is, for any positive definite matrix ,             is semipositive
definite. In other words, the choice          as the weight matrix of the WPC
estimator yields the minimum asymptotic variance of the estimated common
component.
Table 6.4 gives the estimators and the corresponding weight matrix. The
heteroscedastic WPC uses          , which takes into account the cross-sectional
heteroscedasticity of            , while the efficient WPC uses the optimal
weight matrix      . Under the sparsity assumption, the optimal weight matrix can
be estimated using the POET estimator as described in Section 6.3.
Table 6.4 Three interesting choices of the weight matrix
                                               Eigenvectors of
                Regular PC
                Heteroscedastic WPC
                Efficient WPC
The estimated     is the eigenvectors of the largest   eigenvalues of   , and   .


6.5.2 Panel Data Model with Interactive Effects
A closely related model is the panel data with a factor structure in the error term:

                                                                                    38
where      is a     vector of regressors; is a           vector of unknown
coefficients. The regression noise      has a factor structure with unknown
loadings and factors, regarded as an interactive effect of the individual and time
effects. In the model, the only observables are           . This model has been
considered by many researchers, such as Ahn et al. (2001), Pesaran (2006), Bai
(2009), and Moon and Weidner (2010), and has broad applications in social
sciences. For example, in the income studies,        represents the income of
individual at age , and        is a vector of observable characteristics that are
associated with income. Here represents a vector of unmeasured skills, such
as innate ability, motivation, and hardworking; is a vector of unobservable
prices for the unmeasured skills, which can be time-varying.
The goal is to estimate the structural parameter , whose dimension is fixed.
Because the regressor and factor can be correlated, simply regressing on     is
not consistent. Let                 . The least-squares estimator of is

                                                                                    39
with a high-dimensional weight matrix . In particular, it allows a consistent
estimator for      as the optimal weight matrix, which takes into account both
cross-sectional correlation and heteroscedasticity of    over . The minimization
is subjected to the constraint                and        being diagonal.
The estimated      for each given         is simply




On the other hand, given , the variable             has a factor structure. Hence
the estimated       are the weighted principal components estimators: let
be an        matrix                      . The columns of the         matrix
                        are the eigenvectors corresponding to the largest
eigenvalues of                         , and                      . Therefore, given
      , we can estimate , and given , we can estimate            . So can be
simply obtained by iterations, with an initial value. The inversion
does not update during iterations.

6.5.2.1 Optimal Weight Matrix
To present the inferential theory of   , additional notation are needed. Rearrange
the design matrix


Let



Under regularity conditions, Bai and Liao (2013) showed that



where, for              ,



assuming the right-hand side converges in probability.
It is not difficult to show that         is the optimal weight matrix, in the sense
that          is semipositive definite for all positive definite weight matrix   .
With         , the asymptotic variance of is



Assuming       to be sparse, one can estimate  based on an initial estimator of
  . Specifically, define    as in (39) with   , which is the estimator used in
Bai (2009) and Moon and Weidner (2010). Apply the singular value
decomposition to




where          are the eigenvalues–eigenvectors of                               in
a decreasing order such that               . Then                  ,




where       is the same thresholding function. The optimal weight matrix
can then be estimated by     , and the resulting estimator achieves the
asymptotic variance      .

6.5.3 Numerical Illustrations
We present a simple numerical example to compare the weighted principal
components with the popular methods in the literature. The idiosyncratic error
terms are generated as follows: let        be i.i.d.        in both . Let




where              are i.i.d.      . Then      is a banded matrix, with both cross-
sectional correlation and heteroscedasticity. Let the two factors         be i.i.d.
       , and              be uniform on      .

6.5.3.1 Pure Factor Model
Consider the pure factor model                      . Estimators based on three
weight matrices are compared: PC using          ; HWPC using                and
EWPC using             . Here    is estimated using the POET estimator. The
smallest canonical correlation (the larger the better) between the estimators and
parameters are calculated, as an assessment of the estimation accuracy. The
simulation is replicated 100 times, and the average canonical correlations are
reported in Table 6.5. The mean squared error of the estimated common
components are also compared.
Table 6.5 Canonical correlations for simulation study (from Bai and Liao, 2013)
                      Loadings                        Factors
          PC HWPC EWPC PC HWPC EWPC PC HWPC EWPC
         (The larger the better) (The larger the better) (The smaller the better)
 100 80 0.433 0.545 0.631 0.427 0.551 0.652 0.570 0.540 0.496
 100 150 0.613 0.761 0.807 0.661 0.835 0.902 0.385 0.346 0.307
 100 200 0.751 0.797 0.822 0.827 0.882 0.924 0.333 0.312 0.284
 150 100 0.380 0.558 0.738 0.371 0.557 0.749 0.443 0.394 0.334
 150 200 0.836 0.865 0.885 0.853 0.897 0.942 0.313 0.276 0.240
 150 300 0.882 0.892 0.901 0.927 0.946 0.973 0.257 0.243 0.222
The columns of loadings and factors report the canonical correlations.

We see that the estimation becomes more accurate when we increase the
dimensionality. HWPC improves the regular PC, while the EWPC gives the best
estimation results.

6.5.3.2 Interactive Effects
Adding a regression term, we consider the panel data model with interactive
effect:                         , where the true         . The regressors are
generated to be dependent on       :


where         and        are independent i.i.d. standard normal.
Both methods, PC (Bai, 2009; Moon and Weidner, 2010) and WPC with
         , are carried out to estimate for the comparison. The simulation is
replicated 100 times; results are summarized in Table 6.6. We see that both
methods are almost unbiased, while the efficient WPC indeed has significantly
smaller standard errors than the regular PC method in the panel model with
interactive effects.
Table 6.6 Method comparison for the panel data with interactive effects (from
Bai and Liao, 2013)


                          Mean         Normalized SE             Mean         Normalized SE
                 WPC PC WPC                         PC WPC PC WPC                          PC
         100 100 1.002 1.010 0.550                 1.418 3.000 3.003 0.416                1.353
         100 150 1.003 1.007 0.681                 1.626 2.999 3.000 0.611                1.683
         100 200 1.002 1.005 0.631                 1.800 3.000 3.000 0.774                1.752
         150 100 1.003 1.006 0.772                 1.399 3.000 2.999 0.714                1.458
         150 150 1.001 1.005 0.359                 1.318 3.000 3.001 0.408                1.379
         150 200 1.001 1.003 0.547                 1.566 3.000 3.000 0.602                1.762
“Mean” is the average of the estimators; “Normalized SE” is the standard error of the estimators multiplied
by       .



6.6 Conclusions
Large covariance and precision (inverse covariance) matrix estimations have
become fundamental problems in multivariate analysis that find applications in
many fields, ranging from economics and finance to biology, social networks,
and health sciences.
We introduce two efficient methods for estimating large covariance matrices and
precision matrices. The introduced precision matrix estimator assumes the
precision matrix to be sparse, which is immediately applicable for Gaussian
graphical models. It is tuning-parameter insensitive, and simultaneously achieves
the minimax optimal rates of convergence in precision matrix estimation under
different matrix norms. On the other hand, the estimator based on factor analysis
imposes a conditional sparsity assumption. Computationally, our procedures are
significantly faster than existing methods. Both theoretical properties and
numerical performances of these methods are presented and illustrated. In
addition, we also discussed several financial applications of the proposed
methods, including risk management, testing high-dimensional factor pricing
models. We also illustrate how the proposed covariance estimators can be used
to improve statistical efficiency in estimating factor models and panel data
models.
models.

References
Ahn, S., Lee, Y. and Schmidt, P. (2001). Gmm estimation of linear panel data
models with time-varying individual effects. Journal of Econometrics, 101, 219–
255.
Ahn S.C. and Horenstein, A.R. (2013). Eigenvalue ratio test for the number of
factors. Econometrica, 81 (3), 1203–1227.
Alessi, L., Barigozzi, M. and Capasso, M. (2010). Improved penalization for
determining the number of factors in approximate factor models. Statistics &
Probability Letters, 80 (23), 1806–1813.
Antoniadis, A. and Fan, J. (2001). Regularization of wavelet approximations.
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 96 (455), 939–955.
Bach, F.R. (2008). Bolasso: model consistent lasso estimation through the
bootstrap. In Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML). http://www.di.ens.fr/
∼fbach/fbach_bolasso_icml2008.pdf
Bai, J. (2003). Inferential theory for factor models of large dimensions.
Econometrica, 71 (1), 135–171.
Bai, J. (2009). Panel data models with interactive fixed effects. Econometrica,
77, 1229–1279.
Bai, J. and Liao, Y. (2013). Statistical inferences using large estimated
covariances for panel data and factor models. Technical report, University of
Maryland.
Bai, J. and Ng, S. (2002). Determining the number of factors in approximate
factor models. Econometrica, 70, 191–221.
Banerjee, O., El Ghaoui, L. and d'Aspremont, A. (2008). Model selection
through sparse maximum likelihood estimation for multivariate Gaussian or
binary data. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9, 485–516.
Beaulieu, M., Dufour, J. and Khalaf, L. (2007). Multivariate tests of mean-
variance efficiency with possibly non-Gaussian errors: an exact simulation based
approach. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 25, 398–410.
Belloni, A., Chernozhukov, V. and Wang, L. (2012). Square-root lasso: pivotal
recovery of sparse signals via conic programming. Biometrika, 98, 791–806.
Ben-david, S., Luxburg, U.V. and Pal, D. (2006). A sober look at clustering
stability. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of Learning Theory. New
York: Springer, pp. 5–19.
Bickel, P. and Levina, E. (2008). Covariance regularization by thresholding.
Annals of Statistics, 36 (6), 2577–2604.
Boos, D.D., Stefanski, L.A. and Wu, Y. (2009). Fast FSR variable selection with
applications to clinical trials. Biometrics, 65 (3), 692–700.
Cai, T. and Liu, W. (2011). Adaptive thresholding for sparse covariance matrix
estimation. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 106 (494), 672–684.
Cai, T., Liu, W. and Luo, X. (2011). A constrained minimization approach to
sparse precision matrix estimation. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 106 (494), 594–607.
Campbell, J.Y., Lo, A.W.C., MacKinlay, A.C., et al. (1997). The econometrics
of financial markets, vol. 2. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Candès, E.J., Li, X., Ma, Y. and Wright, J. (2011). Robust principal component
analysis? Journal of the ACM (JACM), 58 (3), 11.
Chamberlain, G. and Rothschild, M. (1983). Arbitrage, factor structure and
mean-variance analysis in large asset markets. Econometrica, 51, 1305–1324.
Chandrasekaran, V., Parrilo, P.A. and Willsky, A.S. (2010). Latent variable
graphical model selection via convex optimization. In 48th Annual Allerton
Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton), 2010.
Piscataway, NJ: IEEE, pp. 1610–1613.
Chen, J. and Chen, Z. (2008). Extended Bayesian information criteria for model
selection with large model spaces. Biometrika, 95 (3), 759–771.
Chen, J. and Chen, Z. (2012). Extended BIC for small- -large- sparse GLM.
Statistica Sinica, 22, 555–574.
Dempster, A. (1972). Covariance selection. Biometrics, 28, 157–175.
Efron, B. (2004). The estimation of prediction error: covariance penalties and
cross-validation. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 99, 619–632.
El Karoui, N. (2008). Operator norm consistent estimation of large dimensional
sparse covariance matrices. Annals of Statistics, 36 (6), 2717–2756.
El Karoui, N. (2010). High-dimensionality effects in the Markowitz problem and
other quadratic programs with linear constraints: risk underestimation. Annals of
Statistics, 38 (6), 3487–3566.
Fama, E. and French, K. (1992). The cross-section of expected stock returns.
Journal of Finance, 47, 427–465.
Fan, J., Fan, Y. and Lv, J. (2008). High dimensional covariance matrix
estimation using a factor model. Journal of Econometrics, 147 (1), 186–197.
Fan, J., Liao, Y. and Mincheva, M. (2011). High dimensional covariance matrix
estimation in approximate factor models. Annals of Statistics, 39, 3320–3356.
Fan, J., Liao, Y. and Mincheva, M. (2013). Large covariance estimation by
thresholding principal orthogonal complements (with discussion). Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 75, 603–680.
Fan, J., Liao, Y. and Shi, X. (2014a). Risks of large portfolios. Technical report.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University.
Fan, J., Liao, Y. and Yao, J. (2014b). Large panel test of factor pricing models.
Technical report. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University.
Foster, D.P. and George, E.I. (1994). The risk inflation criterion for multiple
regression. Annals of Statistics, 22 (4), 1947–1975.
Foygel, R. and Drton, M. (2010). Extended Bayesian information criteria for
Gaussian graphical models. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 23, 604–612.
Friedman, J., Hastie, T. and Tibshirani, R. (2007). Pathwise coordinate
optimization. Annals of Applied Statistics, 1 (2), 302–332.
Friedman, J., Hastie, T. and Tibshirani, R. (2008). Sparse inverse covariance
estimation with the graphical lasso. Biostatistics, 9 (3), 432–441.
Fryzlewicz, P. (2013). High-dimensional volatility matrix estimation via
wavelets and thresholding. Biometrika, 100, 921–938.
Gibbons, M., Ross, S. and Shanken, J. (1989). A test of the efficiency of a given
portfolio. Econometrica, 57, 1121–1152.
Hallin, M. and Liška, R. (2007). Determining the number of factors in the
general dynamic factor model. Journal of the American Statistical Association,
102 (478), 603–617.
Han, F., Zhao, T. and Liu, H. (2012). High dimensional nonparanormal
discriminant analysis. Technical report, Department of Biostatistics. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.
Jagannathan, R. and Ma, T. (2003). Risk reduction in large portfolios: why
imposing the wrong constraints helps. Journal of Finance, 58, 1651–1684.
Jalali, A., Johnson, C. and Ravikumar, P. (2012). High-dimensional sparse
inverse covariance estimation using greedy methods. International Conference
on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics.
Kapetanios, G. (2010). A testing procedure for determining the number of
factors in approximate factor models with large datasets. Journal of Business &
Economic Statistics, 28 (3), 397–409.
Lam, C. and Fan, J. (2009). Sparsistency and rates of convergence in large
covariance matrix estimation. Annals of Statistics, 37 (6B), 4254.
Lange, T., Roth, V., Braun, M.L. and Buhmann, J.M. (2004). Stability-based
validation of clustering solutions. Neural Computation, 16 (6), 1299–1323.
Ledoit, O. and Wolf, M. (2003). Improved estimation of the covariance matrix
of stock returns with an application to portfolio selection. Journal of Empirical
Finance, 10 (5), 603–621.
Liu, H., Roeder, K. and Wasserman, L. (2010). Stability approach to
regularization selection (stars) for high dimensional graphical models
Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (NIPS).
Liu, H. and Wang, L. (2012). TIGER: a tuning-insensitive approach for
optimally estimating gaussian graphical models. Technical report, Department of
Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University.
Liu, W. and Luo, X. (2012). High-dimensional sparse precision matrix
Liu, W. and Luo, X. (2012). High-dimensional sparse precision matrix
estimation via sparse column inverse operator. arXiv/1203.3896.
Lysen, S. (2009). Permuted inclusion criterion: A variable selection technique.
Publicly accessible Penn Dissertations. Paper 28.
MacKinlay, A. and Richardson, M. (1991). Using generalized method of
moments to test mean-variance efficiency. Journal of Finance, 46, 511–527.
Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio selection. Journal of Finance, 7, 77–91.
Meinshausen, N. and Bühlmann, P. (2006). High dimensional graphs and
variable selection with the lasso. Annals of Statistics, 34 (3), 1436–1462.
Meinshausen, N. and Bühlmann, P. (2010). Stability selection. Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society, Series B, Methodological, 72, 417–473.
Moon, R. and Weidner, M. (2010). Linear regression for panel with unknown
number of factors as interactive fixed effects. Technical report. Los Angeles:
University of South California.
Newey, W. and West, K. (1987). A simple, positive semi-definite,
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix.
Econometrica, 55, 703–708.
Pesaran, H. (2006). Estimation and inference in large heterogeneous panels with
a multifactor error structure. Econometrica, 74, 967–1012.
Pesaran, H. and Yamagata, T. (2012). Testing capm with a large number of
assets. Technical report. Los Angeles: University of South California.
Pourahmadi, M. (2013). High-dimensional covariance estimation: with high-
dimensional data. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Ravikumar, P., Wainwright, M.J., Raskutti, G. and Yu, B. (2011a). High-
dimensional covariance estimation by minimizing -penalized log-determinant
divergence. Electronic Journal of Statistics, 5, 935–980.
Ravikumar, P., Wainwright, M.J., Raskutti, G., Yu, B., et al. (2011b). High-
dimensional covariance estimation by minimizing -penalized log-determinant
divergence. Electronic Journal of Statistics, 5, 935–980.
Rothman, A.J., Bickel, P.J., Levina, E. and Zhu, J. (2008). Sparse permutation
invariant covariance estimation. Electronic Journal of Statistics 2, 494–515.
Rothman, A.J., Levina, E. and Zhu, J. (2009). Generalized thresholding of large
covariance matrices. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 104(485),
177–186.
Sentana, E. (2009). The econometrics of mean-variance efficiency tests: a
survey. Econometrics Journal, 12, 65–101.
Shen, X., Pan, W. and Zhu, Y. (2012). Likelihood-based selection and sharp
parameter estimation. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 107(497),
223–232.
Stock, J.H. and Watson, M.W. (2002). Forecasting using principal components
from a large number of predictors. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 97(460), 1167–1179.
Sun, T. and Zhang, C.H. (2012). Sparse matrix inversion with scaled lasso.
Technical report, Department of Statistics. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University.
Wainwright, M. (2009). Sharp thresholds for high-dimensional and noisy
sparsity recovery using constrained quadratic programming. IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory, 55(5), 2183–2201.
Wille, A., Zimmermann, P., Vranova, E., Frholz, A., Laule, O., et al. (2004).
Sparse graphical Gaussian modeling of the isoprenoid gene network in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Genome Biology, 5 (11), R92.
Wu, Y., Boos, D.D. and Stefanski, L.A. (2007). Controlling variable selection by
the addition of pseudovariables. Journal of the American Statistical Association,
102, 235–243.
Xue, L. and Zou, H. (2012). Positive-definite -penalized estimation of large
covariance matrices. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 107, 1480–
1491.
Yuan, M. (2010). High dimensional inverse covariance matrix estimation via
linear programming. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11(8), 2261–2286.
Yuan, M. and Lin, Y. (2007). Model selection and estimation in the Gaussian
graphical model. Biometrika, 94 (1), 19–35.
Zhao, P. and Yu, B. (2006). On model selection consistency of lasso. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 7 (11), 2541–2563.
Zhao, T., Liu, H., Roeder, K., Lafferty, J. and Wasserman, L. (2012). The huge
package for high-dimensional undirected graph estimation in . Journal of
Machine Learning Research, forthcoming.
Zou, H. (2006). The adaptive lasso and its oracle properties. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 101 (476), 1418–1429.
Chapter 7
Stochastic Volatility
Modeling and Asymptotic Approaches to Option Pricing and Portfolio Selection
   Matthew Lorig1 and Ronnie Sircar2
   1University of Washington, USA
   2Princeton University, USA



7.1 Introduction
Understanding and measuring the inherent uncertainty in market volatility are
crucial for portfolio optimization, risk management, and derivatives trading. The
problem is made difficult since volatility is not directly observed. Rather,
volatility is a statistic of the observable returns of, for example, a stock, and so
estimates of it are at best noisy. Among the major empirical challenges have
been separating contributions of diffusive and jump components of log returns,
typical timescales of fluctuation, and memory effects. Until recently, data were
limited to low frequencies, typically daily. The availability of high-frequency
data over the past 20 years brings with it issues of deciphering market
microstructure effects such as the bid–ask bounce, which contaminate the
potential usefulness of such large datasets, and we refer to the recent book by
Aït-Sahalia and Jacod (2014) for an overview of the difficulties.
The major problem that has been the driver of stochastic volatility models is the
valuation and hedging of derivative securities. This market grew in large part
from the landmark paper by Black and Scholes (1973), which showed how to
value simple options contracts when volatility is constant. Even at the time of
their paper, Black and Scholes realized that the constant volatility assumption
was a strong idealization. In an empirical paper by Black and Scholes (1972), the
authors tested their option price formulas and concluded: “we found that using
past data to estimate the variance caused the model to overprice options on high-
variance stocks and underprice options on low-variance stocks.” Indeed the
overwhelming evidence from time-series data reveals that volatility exhibits
unpredictable variation. In addition, as we will describe in this chapter, option
prices exhibit a significant departure from the Black–Scholes (constant
volatility) theory, the implied volatility skew, which can be explained by
allowing volatility to vary randomly in time.
A second important problem is portfolio optimization: namely, how to optimally
invest capital between a risky stock and a riskless bank account. In a continuous
timestochastic model with constant volatility, the pioneering work was by
Robert Merton (Merton, 1969, 1971; reprinted in Merton, 1992). Since then,
understanding the effect of volatility uncertainty, stochastic growth rate,
transaction costs, price impact, illiquidity, and other frictions on the portfolio
choice problem has generated considerable research. Here, we will focus on the
effect of stochastic volatility and present some new results in Section 7.3.
The increased realism obtained by allowing volatility to be stochastic comes
with increased computational difficulties. Moreover, there is no broad consensus
concerning how to best model volatility. Here, we will discuss some
computationally efficient approaches, focusing particularly on asymptotic
approximations.

7.1.1 Options and Implied Volatility
The most liquidly traded derivatives contracts are call and put options, which
give the option holder the right to buy (in the case of a call) or sell (in the case of
a put) one unit of the underlying security at a fixed strike price on a fixed
expiration date . Here we are focusing specifically on European-style options
(i.e., no early exercise), which are typically traded on indices such as the S&P
500. If represents the price of a stock or index at time , then a European-style
derivative has a payoff at time , which is a function of . In the case of
calls and puts, the payoff functions are                 and                  ,
respectively.

7.1.1.1 Black–Scholes model
In the Black–Scholes model, the stock price is a geometric Brownian motion
described by the following stochastic differential equation (SDE):

                                                                                   7.1

where is a standard Brownian motion with respect to a historical (or real-
world, or physical) probability measure . Here, the parameters are the expected
growth rate and the volatility , both assumed constant. The remarkable
finding of Black and Scholes (1973) is that the no-arbitrage price of an option
does not depend on , and so, to price an option, the only parameter that needs
to be estimated from data is the volatility . Unless otherwise stated, we shall
assume throughout this article that interest rates are zero.
It will be convenient to introduce the following notation:


where is the current time; and and are the strike and expiration date,
respectively, of a call or put option. Then, for fixed    , the Black–Scholes
pricing formula for a call option with time to expiration    is given by

                                                                                  7.2


where is the CDF of a standard normal random variable, and we have stressed
the volatility argument in the notation.
It turns out that the Black–Scholes price (7.2) can be expressed as the expected
payoff of the option, but where the expectation is taken with respect to a
different probability measure under which the stock price is a martingale (that
is, it is a pure fluctuation process with no trend or growth rate). This means that
there is a so-called risk-neutral world in which the stock price follows the
dynamics



where     is a Brownian motion under , and the call option price (7.2) can be
expressed as the conditional expectation



where     denotes that the expectation is taken under the probability measure      .

7.1.1.2 Implied Volatility
The implied volatility of a given call option with price (which is either
observed in the market or computed from a model) is the unique positive
solution of

                                                                                 7.3
It is the volatility parameter that has to be put into the Black–Scholes formula to
match the observed price .
Note that the implied volatility depends implicitly on the maturity date and
the log strike as the option price will depend on these quantities. The map
               is known as the implied volatility surface. If market option prices
reflected Black–Scholes assumptions, would be constant and equal to the
stock's historical volatility . However, in equities data, the function
exhibits downward-sloping behavior in , whose slope varies with the option
maturities , as illustrated in Figure 7.1. This downward slope is known as the
implied volatility skew.
Figure 7.1 Implied volatility from S&P 500 index options on May 25, 2010,
plotted as a function of log-moneyness to maturity ratio:              . DTM,
days to maturity.
These features of the implied volatility surface can be reproduced by enhancing
the Black–Scholes model (7.1) with stochastic volatility and/or jumps. One focus
of this chapter will be to survey some approaches taken to capturing the implied
volatility skew.

7.1.2 Volatility Modeling
While the overwhelming evidence from time-series and option price data
indicates that the volatility in (7.1) should be allowed to vary stochastically in
time:



there is no consensus as to how exactly the (stochastic) volatility   should be
modeled.

7.1.2.1 No-arbitrage Pricing and Risk-Neutral Measure
In standard option-pricing theory, it is assumed that markets do not admit
arbitrage. No arbitrage pricing implies that all traded asset prices (after
discounting) are martingales under some probability measure , typically
referred to as a risk-neutral measure. Consequently, the price of an option at
time with payoff           at time is given by

                                                                                  7.4
where      is the history of the market up to time . Typically there are nontraded
sources of randomness such as jumps or stochastic volatility. As a result, there
exist infinitely many risk-neutral measures. The nonuniqueness of these
measures is often referred to as market incompleteness, meaning not every
derivative asset can be perfectly hedged. In practice, one assumes that the market
has chosen a specific risk-neutral measure, which is consistent with observed
option prices.
In what follows, we will model asset dynamics under a unique risk-neutral
pricing measure , which we assume has been chosen by the market. Under            ,
we have
                                                                                     7.5

which describes the dynamics of         . In the rest of this section, we review
some of the most common models of volatility and discuss some of their
advantages and disadvantages.

7.1.2.2 Local Volatility Models
In local volatility (LV) models, the volatility of the underlying is modeled as a
deterministic function       of time , and the time- value of the underlying .
That is,



Typically, one assumes that the function         increases as decreases in order
to capture the leverage effect, which refers to the tendency for the value of an
asset to decrease as its volatility increases.
One advantage of local volatility models is that markets remain complete,
meaning that derivatives written on can be hedged perfectly – just as in the
Black–Scholes model. While market completeness is convenient from a
theoretical point of view, it is not necessarily a realistic property of financial
markets. Indeed, if markets are complete, then one can ask: why do we need
derivatives?
Another advantage of local volatility models is that they can provide a very tight
fit to option prices quoted on the market. In fact, Dupire (1994) shows that there
exists a local volatility model that can exactly match option prices quoted on the
market and that there is an explicit formula for how to construct this model from
observed call and put prices under the assumption that they can be interpolated
across continuous strikes and maturities. However, a tight fit must be balanced
with stability: local volatility models are notoriously bad at providing stability
and typically need to be recalibrated hourly.

7.1.2.3 Stochastic Volatility Models
In a stochastic volatility (SV) model, promoted in the late 1980s by Hull and
White (1987), Scott (1987), and Wiggins (1987), the volatility of the
underlying is modeled as a deterministic function      of some auxiliary process
  , which is usually modeled as a diffusion:
                                                                                 7.6




with        . Here,    is a Brownian motion that is correlated with       .
Onetypically takes the correlation to be negative in order to capture the
empirical observation that when volatility goes up, stock prices tend to go down,
which is called the leverage effect. In a single-factor stochastic volatility setting
such as that described by (7.6), derivatives written on cannot be perfectly
hedged by continuously trading a bond and the underlying alone. However, a
derivative written on can be perfectly replicated by continuously trading a
bond, the underlying , and a single option on . Thus, assuming options can be
traded continuously can complete the market. However, as transaction costs on
options are much higher than on stocks, and as their liquidity is typically lower,
this assumption typically is not made. Unlike the local volatility case, there is no
explicit formula for constructing dynamics and a volatility function            so
that model-induced option prices fit observed market prices exactly.
It is common to assume that the volatility driving process is mean-reverting,
or ergodic, meaning there exists a distribution such that the ergodic theorem
holds:




for all bounded functions    .
Equation (7.6) actually refers specifically to one-factor stochastic volatility
models. One can always introduce another auxiliary process , and model the
volatility as a function           of both and . If , , and are driven by
three distinct Brownian motions, then continuously trading a bond, the
underlying , and two options on would be required to perfectly hedge further
options on . Multifactor stochastic volatility models have the ability of fit
option prices better than their one-factor counterparts. But, each additional factor
of volatility brings with it additional computational challenges. Multifactor and
multiscale stochastic volatility models are discussed at length in Fouque et al.
(2011).

7.1.2.4 Local-Stochastic Volatility Models
As the name suggests, local-stochastic volatility (LSV) models combine features
of both local volatility and stochastic volatility models by modeling the volatility
   as a function          of time , the underlying , and an auxiliary process
(possibly multidimensional). For example,

                                                                                 7.7




where        . Note that the class of models described by (7.7) nests all LV
models and all (one-factor) SV models. However, while LSV models offer more
modeling flexibility than LV or SV models separately, these models also present
new computational challenges. Indeed, while there exist LV and SV models for
which option prices can be computed in closed form (or semiclosed form, e.g.,
up to Fourier inversion), explicit formulas for option prices are available in an
LSV setting only when         . We remark that having a closed-form formula or a
fast approximation is crucial for the inverse problem of calibrating an LSV
model from observed option prices.

7.1.2.5 Models with Jumps
Some authors argue that diffusion models of the form (7.5) are not adequate to
capture the complex dynamics of stock price processes because diffusion models
do not allow stock prices to jump. Discontinuities in the stock price process can
be modeled by adding a jump term       to the process (7.5) as follows:




and this type of model dates back to Merton (1976). Here, jumps arrive as a
Poisson process with intensity and have distribution , and the drift of is
compensated to ensure that          is a martingale under . As with SV models,
jumps render a market incomplete. Adding jumps also to volatility can help fit
the strong implied volatility smile that is commonly observed for short maturity
options, and we refer to Bakshi et al. (1997) for an analysis.

7.1.2.6 ARCH and GARCH Models
Although our focus will be on the continuous-time models, it is worth
mentioning that discrete-time models for stock returns are widely studied in
econometrics literature. A large class of discrete-time models are the
autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity (ARCH) processes introduced by
Engle (1982), later generalized under the name GARCH. The discrete-time
models that are closest to the type of continuous-time stochastic volatility
models (7.6) driven by diffusions are the EGARCH models developed in Nelson
(1991, 1990). Those papers also discuss convergence of the discrete-time
EGARCH process to an exponential Ornstein–Uhlenbeck continuous-time
stochastic volatility model.

7.2 Asymptotic Regimes and Approximations
Given a model and its parameters, computing expectations of the form (7.4) one
time is straightforward using Monte Carlo methods or a numerical solution of
the associated pricing partial integro-differential equation (PIDE). However,
when the computation is part of an iterative procedure to calibrate the model to
the observed implied volatility surface, it becomes important to have a fast
method of computing option prices or model-induced implied volatilities. As a
result, a number of different efficient approximation methods have developed.
Broadly speaking, there are two methods of setting up asymptotic expansions for
option pricing and implied volatility. In contract asymptotics, one considers
extreme regimes specific to the option contract, in other words, large or small
time-to-maturity       , or large or small strikes . In the model asymptotics
approach, one views the complicated incomplete market model as a perturbation
around a more tractable model, often the Black–Scholes model (7.1).

7.2.1 Contract Asymptotics
The foundational papers in this approach appeared in 2004. The main result from
Lee (2004), commonly referred to as the moment formula, relates the implied
volatility slope at extreme strikes to the largest finite moment of the stock price.
We refer to the recent book by Gulisashvili (2012) for an overview of this and
related asymptotics.
The approach pioneered by Berestycki et al. (2004) uses large-deviation
calculations for the short-time regime. The regime where the time-to-maturity is
large is studied by Tehranchi (2009). However, for the rest of this chapter, we
concentrate on model asymptotics as they are adaptable to other option contracts
and, moreover, are amenable to nonlinear portfolio optimization problems, as we
discuss in Section 7.3.
7.2.2 Model Asymptotics
We will present the analysis in terms of the log-stock price            , and
consider a European option with payoff          at time , where               .
There may be other factors such as stochastic volatility driving the stock price
dynamics, and we denote these by the (possibly multidimensional) process . If
      is (jointly) a Markov process, then the time price           of the European
option is an expectation of the form


Here, we are using the Markov property of          to replace the filtration   in
(7.4) with the time- values of    .
Under mild conditions on the processes        and the payoff function , the
function       is sufficiently smooth to be the solution of the Kolmogorov
backward equation (KBE)

                                                                                  7.8
where the operator        is the generator of      (which may have -dependence
from the coefficients of        ). The operator     is, in general, a second-order
partial integro-differential operator. Unfortunately, equation (7.8) rarely has a
closed-form solution – especially when we include realistic features such as
jumps and stochastic volatility. As such, onetypically seeks an approximate
solution to (7.8). We will discuss an approach to this using perturbation theory
(also referred to as asymptotic analysis).
Perturbation theory is a classical tool developed to solve problems arising in
physics and engineering. We describe its use here to find an approximate
solution to (typically) a PIDE starting from the exact solution of a related PIDE.
More specifically, suppose the integro-differential operator       in (7.8) can be
written in the form

                                                                                 7.9

where each         in the sequence        is an integro-differential operators, and
      is a (typically small) parameter. Formally, one seeks an approximate
solution to (7.8) by expanding the function as a power series in the parameter
                                                                                    7.10

Inserting the expansion (7.9) for    and the expansion (7.10) for        into the
PIDE (7.8), and collecting like powers of , one finds




The approximating sequence of functions          is then found by solving the above
nested sequence of PIDEs.
This method is most useful when the fundamental solution (also referred to as
Green's function), corresponding to the operator   , is available in closed
form. It is the solution of


where      is the Dirac delta function (or point mass at zero).
Upon finding , the approximating sequence of functions            can be written
down directly:

                                                                                    7.11


                                                                                    7.12

where the operator          is referred to as the semigroup generated by         .
Finding an appropriate decomposition of the generator                      is a bit of
an art. In general, the most appropriate decomposition will depend strongly on
the underlying process (from which           is derived). As a starting point, it will
help to identify operators     for which the fundamental solution can be
written in closed form or semiclosed form, and we shall discuss some examples
in Section 7.2.4.

7.2.3 Implied Volatility Asymptotics
Models are typically calibrated to implied volatilities rather than to prices
directly. As such, it is useful to have closed-form approximations for model-
induced implied volatilities. In this section, we will show how to translate an
expansion for option prices into an expansion for implied volatilities.
Throughout this section, we fix a model for                , a time , a maturity date
     , the initial values       , and a call option payoff                      . Our
goal is to find the implied volatility for this particular call option. To ease
notation, we will suppress much of the dependence on                 . However, the
reader should keep in mind that the implied volatility of the option under
consideration does depend on              , even if this is not explicitly indicated.
Assume that the option price      has an expansion of the form

                                                                                    7.13

We wish to find the implied volatility corresponding to , which is the unique
positive solution of (7.3). To find the unknown implied volatility , we expand it
in powers of as follows:




Expanding          about the point , we find

                                                                                    7.14




Inserting the expansion (7.13) for and the expansion (7.14) for              into
equation (7.3), and collecting like powers of , we obtain
Using            , we can solve for the sequence     recursively. We have

                                                                            7.15

                                                                            7.16




Note that the implied volatility expansion involves both model-independent and
model-dependent terms:

                                                                            7.17

The model-independent terms are always explicit. For example, using (7.2), a
direct computation reveals




Higher order terms are also explicit. Whether or not the model-dependent terms
in (7.17) can be computed explicitly (i.e., meaning without numerical integration
or special functions) depends on the specific form the sequence    takes.

7.2.4 Tractable Models
We say that a model is tractable if its generator        admits a closed-form (or
semiclosed form) fundamental solution . A large class of tractable models are
the exponential Lévy models. In this class, a traded asset      is described by
the following Lévy–Itô SDE:
                                                                                 7.18

Here,     is a standard Brownian motion and      is an independent compensated
Poisson random measure:



The last term in (7.18) can be understood as follows: for any Borel set , the
process      is a Poisson process with intensity     . Thus, the probability that
   experiences a jump of size       in the time interval         is       . In
order for to be a martingale, the drift must be given by



The generator     of    is given by

                                                                                 7.19

where the operator     is a shift operator:              .
When has no jump component (i.e., when          ), the generator  has a
fundamental solution that can be written in closed form as a Gaussian kernel:




More generally, when jumps are present, the generator    has a fundamental
solution , which is available in semiclosed form as a Fourier transform:

                                                                                 7.20

where



The function     is referred to as the characteristic exponent of   , since it
satisfies
Using (7.11) and (7.20), we can express the action of the semigroup operator
       on a general function as follows:




where    is the Fourier transform of   :



Because the semigroup operator            corresponding to     is well understood
in the exponential Lévy setting, if one can write the generator of a process
as               with     given by (7.19), then one can use (7.11)–(7.12) to find
approximate solutions to the full pricing PIDE              .

7.2.5 Model Coefficient Polynomial Expansions
Model coefficient expansions are developed in a series of papers by Lorig et al.
(2014, 2015a, b, c, d). The authors' method (which we shall henceforth refer to
as LPP) can be used to find closed-form asymptotic approximations for option
prices and implied volatilities in a general -dimensional Markov setting.
Here,for simplicity, we focus on two simple cases: (i) general two-dimensional
local-stochastic volatility (LSV) models, and (ii) general scalar Lévy-type
models.

7.2.5.1 LSV models
We consider a general class of models, in which an asset      is modeled as the
exponential of a Markov diffusion process that satisfies the SDEs




where      and      are correlated Brownian motions. This is as in the model
discussed in Section 7.1.2.4 except we remove the explicit -dependence in the
coefficients for simplicity. Note that the drift of is     , which ensures that
      is a   -martingale and so the stock price is arbitrage free.
The generator    of    is given by

                                                                              7.21
where we have defined



For general coefficients      , there is no closed-form (or even semiclosed-
form) expression of , the fundamental solution corresponding to . Thus, we
seek a decomposition of               for which the order-zero operator
admits a closed-form fundamental solution .
The LPP approach is to expand the coefficients of in polynomial basis
functions where the zeroth-order terms in the expansion are constant.
Specifically,




where     is a constant and       depends polynomially on        and   for every
    . For example, Taylor series:

                                                                              7.22

or Hermite polynomials:




In the Taylor series example,      is a fixed point in . In the Hermite
polynomial example, the brackets        indicate an inner product with a
Gaussian weighting. The Hermite polynomials           form a complete basis in
this space and (properly weighted) are orthonormal                   .
Upon expanding the coefficients of      in polynomial basis functions, one can
formally write the operator as
                                                                            7.23

where



Note that the operator     in (7.23) is of the form (7.9) if one sets   .
Moreover, the order-zero operator



has a fundamental solution      , which is a Gaussian density:




with covariance matrix      and mean vector      given by




Since is available in closed form, one can use (7.11) and (7.12) to find and
the sequence of functions      , respectively. After a bit of algebra, one can
show that

                                                                            7.24
where the operator       is of the form



The precise form of the coefficients       will depend on the choice of
polynomial basis function. If the coefficients of are smooth and bounded, then
the small-time-to-maturity accuracy of the price approximation is




The proof can be found in Lorig et al. (2015a).
The LPP price expansion also leads to closed-form expressions for implied
volatility. Indeed, for European call options, one can easily show that
                . Therefore, the series expansion for is of the form (7.13), and
hence              can be computed using (7.15)–(7.16). Moreover, the model-
dependent terms              appearing in (7.15)–(7.16) can be computed
explicitly with no numerical integration. This is due to the fact that can be
written in the form (7.24). For details, we refer the reader to Lorig et al. (2015b).


  Example 7.1 (Heston Model)
  Consider the Heston (1993) model, under which the risk-neutral dynamics of
    are given by




  The generator of        is given by




  Thus, using (7.21), we identify




  We fix a time to maturity and -strike . Assuming a Taylor series
  expansion (7.22) of the coefficients of with      , the time levels
  of     , one computes
The expression for is also explicit, but omitted for brevity. In Figure 7.2,
we plot the approximate implied volatility                as well as the
exact implied volatility , which can be computed using the pricing formula
given in Heston (1993) and then inverting the Black–Scholes formula
numerically.




Figure 7.2 Exact (solid) and approximate (dashed) implied volatilities in the
Heston model. The horizontal axis is   -moneyness        . Parameters:
       ,        ,        ,                ,        .
7.2.5.2 Lévy-type models
In this section, we explore how the LPP method can be applied to compute
approximate option prices in a one-dimensional Lévy-type setting. Specifically,
we consider an asset        , where is a scalar Lévy-type Markov process.
Under some integrability conditions on the size and intensity of jumps, every
scalar Markov process on can be expressed as the solution of a Lévy–Itô SDE
of the form:



where    is a standard Brownian motion; and      is a state-dependent
compensated Poisson random measure



Note that jumps are now described by a Lévy kernel       , which is a Lévy
measure for every      . In order for to be a martingale, the drift must be
given by



The generator       of   is



For general drift    variance      and Lévy kernel      , there is no closed-
form (or even semiclosed-form) expression for the fundamental solution
corresponding to . Thus, we seek a decomposition of generator              for
which     has a fundamental solution available in semiclosed form.
Once again, the LPP approach of expanding the coefficients and Levy kernel of
  in polynomial basis functions will lead to the desired form for the expansion
of . Specifically, let




where           ;             ; and           ; and higher order terms      ,
     , and         depend polynomially on . For example,



and similarly for and . Upon expanding the coefficients of       in polynomial
basis functions, one can formally write the operator as              , where
is given by

                                                                            7.25

and each     for       is of the form



Comparing (7.25) with (7.19), we see that   is the generator of a Lévy process.
Thus, using (7.20), the fundamental solution corresponding to       can be
written as a Fourier integral



where



Since is available in closed form, one can use (7.11) and (7.12) to find and
  , respectively. Explicit computations are carried out in Lorig et al. (2015c).
In this case, it is convenient to express    as an (inverse) Fourier transform
of        . Defining




we have
where         is given by



7.2.6 Small “Vol of Vol” Expansion
Lewis (2000) considers a stochastic volatility model of the form




The parameter is referred to as the volatility of volatility, or vol of vol for
short. The generator of       is given by



where



Thus,    is of the form (7.9). Moreover, the solution of


is given by a Gaussian




where                       , and   is the solution of the following ODE:
Since is available in closed form up to finding , one can use (7.11) and
(7.12) to find and the sequence of functions    , respectively. In particular,
for European calls, one finds




As the order-zero price is equal to the Black–Scholes price, computed with
volatility     , one can apply the implied volatility asymptotics of Section 7.2.3
to find approximate implied volatilities. Explicit expressions for approximate
implied vols are given in Lewis (2000) for the case                 and        .

7.2.7 Separation of Timescales Approach
In Fouque et al. (2000, 2011), the authors develop analytic price approximations
for interest rate, credit, and equity derivatives. The authors' approach (henceforth
referred to as FPSS) exploits the separation of timescales that is observed in
volatility time-series data. More specifically, the authors consider a class of
multiscale diffusion models in which the volatility of an underlying is driven by
two factors, and , operating on fast and slow timescales, respectively. Lorig
and Lozano-Carbassé (2015) extend the FPSS method to models with jumps.
Here, for simplicity, we consider an exponential Lévy-type model with a single
slowly varying factor, which drives both the volatility and jump-intensity.
Consider a model for a stock        , where is modeled under the risk-neutral
pricing measure as the solution of the following Lévy–Itô SDE




where      and      are correlated Brownian motions; and is a compensated
state-dependent Poisson random measure with which we associate a Lévy kernel
        . The drift      is fixed by the Lévy kernel and volatility so that is
a martingale:



Note that the volatility   and Lévy kernel     are driven by    , which is slowly
varying in the following sense. Under the physical measure , the dynamics of
  are given by


where                      is a standard -Brownian motion ( is known as the
market price of risk associated with ). The infinitesimal generator of under
the physical measure




is scaled by , which is assumed to be a small parameter:            . Thus,
fluctuates over an intrinsic timescale  , which is large.
Due to the separation of timescales, the         process has a generator that
naturally factors into three terms of different powers of , just as in (7.9):


where     ,     , and    are given by

                                                                                7.26




Here, the shift operator acts on the variable. Comparing equations (7.19)
and (7.26), we observe that, for fixed , the operator     above is the generator
of a Lévy process. As the operator     in (7.26) acts only on the variable , the
variable serves only as a parameter. Thus, we have



where



Because       is of the form (7.9) (set     for      ), and since the fundamental
solution corresponding to      is known, we can use (7.11) and (7.12) to write
   and explicitly. For an option with payoff      , we have



where    is the Fourier transform of   .
A similar computation yields the following expression for    :



where




and




If the coefficients of and the payoff function are smooth and bounded, then
one can establish the following accuracy for the first-order price approximation


which holds pointwise. Note that, to compute the approximate price of an option
        , one does not need full knowledge of               . Rather, at order ,
the information contained in these five functions and two variables is entirely
captured by four group parameters                             . The values of
these four parameters can be obtained by calibrating to observed call and put
prices, as described in detail in Lorig and Lozano-Carbassé (2015).

7.2.8 Comparison of the Expansion Schemes
The approximation methods presented in Sections 7.2.5, 7.2.6, and 7.2.7 exploit
different small parameters in and therefore work best (i.e., provide the most
accurate approximations) in different regimes. Rigorous accuracy results must be
obtained on a case-by-case basis. However, it is generally true that the accuracy
of              depends on how well                 approximates .
For example, the Taylor series expansion described in Section 7.2.5 works best
if the coefficients of are slowly varying. In this case, the coefficients can be
well approximated by a Taylor series of low order. Thus, a highly accurate
approximation of can be obtained with only a few terms.
The approximation considered in Section 7.2.6 works best when the diffusion
coefficient of the volatility-driving process is small in comparison to the drift
coefficient of and the drift and diffusion coefficients of .
Finally, the approximation considered in Section 7.2.7 is when the drift
coefficient of the volatility-driving process is small in comparison to the
diffusion coefficient of , which in turn is small in comparison to the drift and
diffusion coefficients of . As mentioned in this chapter, this means that the
intrinsic timescale of must be slow in comparison to the intrinsic timescale of
  .

7.3 Merton Problem with Stochastic Volatility:
Model Coefficient Polynomial Expansions
A landmark pair of papers on optimal investment strategy by Robert Merton
analyzed the problem of how an investor should optimally allocate his wealth
between a riskless bond and some risky assets, in order to maximize his expected
utility of wealth. This problem and its variation are now referred to as the
Merton problem.
In the original papers, each of the risky assets follows geometric Brownian
motion with constant volatility. This modeling assumption is convenient from
the standpoint of analytic tractability but is not realistic in practice, as it does not
allow for stochastic volatility. Because of this, there has been much interest in
analyzing how an investor's optimal investment strategy changes in the presence
of stochastic volatility. Here, we focus on asymptotic methods for analyzing the
stochastic control problem associated with portfolio optimization.
Analysis with multiscale stochastic volatility models described in Section 7.2.7
was presented in the case of simple power utilities in Fouque et al. (2000 Section
10.1), and expansions for a hedging problem in Jonsson and Sircar (2002a, b) in
the dual optimization problem, both for fast mean-reverting stochastic volatility.
In Fouque et al. (2013), expansions are constructed directly in the primal
problem under both fast and slow volatility fluctuations. Indifference pricing
approximations with exponential utility and fast volatility were studied in Sircar
and Zariphopoulou (2005). In this section, we present some new approximations
for the Merton problem with stochastic volatility.

7.3.1 Models and Dynamic Programming Equation
The polynomial expansion techniques outlined in Section 7.2.5 can be extended
to find explicit asymptotic solutions to the Merton problem in a general local-
stochastic volatility (LSV) setting, that is,            . To fix ideas, however,
we consider the simpler stochastic volatility (SV) setting, in which a risky asset
  , under the physical probability measure , is the solution of the following
SDE:



where     and     are standard Brownian motions with correlation . Let
denote the wealth process of an investor who holds units worth of currency in
   at time , and has           units of currency in a bond. For simplicity, we
assume the risk-free rate of interest is zero. As such, the wealth process
satisfies



Observe that    does not appear in the dynamics of the wealth process     .
An investor chooses to maximize his expected utility of wealth at a time in
the future, where utility is measured by a smooth, increasing, and strictly
concave function                , and the objective to maximize is        .
Increasing describes a preference for more wealth than less, whereas concavity
captures risk aversion, with more concave being more risk averse. The analysis
is illustrated with power utility functions in Section 7.3.3.
We define the investor's value function    by



where    is the set of admissible strategies:
where adapted means adapted to the filtration generated by          .
Assuming that                      , the value function solves the Hamilton–
Jacobi–Bellman partial differential equation (HJB-PDE) problem:

                                                                               7.27
where            is the generator of        , assuming a Markov investment
strategy               . Specifically, the operators    and    are given by




The optimal strategy     is given by

                                                                               7.28

where, for simplicity (and from now on), we have omitted the arguments            .
Inserting the optimal strategy     into the HJB-PDE (7.27) yields

                                                                               7.29
where       is a nonlinear term:




Here, we have introduced the Sharpe ratio                   .

7.3.2 Asymptotic Approximation
For general         , there is no closed-form solution of (7.29). Hence, we seek
an asymptotic approximation for . To this end, using equation (7.22) from
Section 7.2.5.1 as a guide, we expand the coefficients in (7.29) in a Taylor series
about an arbitrary point . Specifically, for any function             , we may
formally write

                                                                               7.30
where we have once again introduced for purposes of accounting. We also
expand the function as a power series in

                                                                            7.31

Now, for each group of coefficients appearing in (7.29), we insert an expansion
of the form (7.30), and we define

                                                                            7.32

We also insert into (7.29) our expansion (7.31) for .
Next, collecting terms of like powers of , we obtain at lowest order




with                . We can look for a solution            that is independent
of , and then we have

                                                                            7.33

We observe that (7.33) is the same nonlinear PDE problem that arises when one
considers an underlying that has a constant drift      , diffusion coefficient
        , and Sharpe ratio                    .
It is convenient to define the risk-tolerance function




and the operators



We now proceed to the order        terms. Using            and (7.33), we
obtain

                                                                            7.34
                                                                                        7.35
which is a linear PDE problem for        .
We can rewrite equations (7.34)–(7.35) more compactly as

                                                                                        7.36
where the linear operator        and the source term              are given by



Observe that (7.36) is a linear PDE for       .
The following change of variables (see Fouque et al., 2013) will be useful for
solving the PDE problem (7.36). Define

                                                                                        7.37

Inserting (7.37) into (7.36), we find that        satisfies

                                                                                        7.38
where the operator     is given by

                                                                                        7.39

and the function     satisfies                                .
Now, from (7.32) and (7.39), we observe that the operator          is the
infinitesimal generator of a diffusion in whose drift vector and covariance
matrix are constant. The semigroup        generated by           is given by



where , the fundamental solution corresponding to                            , is a Gaussian
kernel:




with covariance matrix      and vector       given by
By Duhamel's principle, the unique classical solution to (7.38) is given by




In the case of a general utility function, (7.33) is easily solved numerically, for
instance by solving the fast diffusion (or Black's) equation for the risk tolerance
function (see Fouque et al., 2013). Then, can also be computed
numerically using the formulas above. In the case of power utility, there are
explicit formulas, as given in Section 7.3.3.
Having obtained an approximation for the value function               , we now
seek an expansion for the optimal control              . Inserting the expansion
(7.30) of the coefficients and the expansion (7.31) for into (7.28), and
collecting terms of like powers of , we obtain

                                                                                7.40


                                                                                7.41




Higher order terms for both the value function and the optimal control         can
be obtained in the same manner as and . Analysis of the asymptotic
formulas for different utility functions and stochastic volatility models is
presented in more detail in Lorig and Sircar (2015).

7.3.3 Power Utility
Finally, we consider a utility function    from the constant relative risk aversion
(CRRA), or power family:




where    is called the risk aversion coefficient. Here, all the quantities above can
be computed explicitly.
The explicit solution     to (7.33) is




The risk-tolerance function is           , and the transformation in (7.37) is then




An explicit computation reveals that       is given by




For the specific case       , the above expression simplifies to




Using these explicit representations of and , the expressions (7.40) and
(7.41) for the optimal stockholding approximations become




For the specific case       , the formula for      simplifies to




7.4 Conclusions
Asymptotic methods can be used to analyze and simplify pricing and portfolio
optimization problems, and we have presented some examples and
methodologies. A key insight is to perturb problems with stochastic volatility
around their constant volatility counterparts to obtain the principle effect of
around their constant volatility counterparts to obtain the principle effect of
volatility uncertainty.
These approaches reduce the dimension of the effective problems that have to be
solved, and often lead to explicit formulas that can be analyzed for intuition. In
the context of portfolio problems accounting for stochastic volatility, recent
progress has been made in cases where there are transaction costs (Bichuch and
Sircar, 2014, Kallsen and Muhle-Karbe, 2013) or stochastic risk aversion that
varies with market conditions (Dong and Sircar, 2014), and under more complex
local-stochastic volatility models (Lorig and Sircar, 2015).

Acknowledgements
RL's work is partially supported by NSF grant DMS-0739195. RS's work is
partially supported by NSF grant DMS-1211906.

References
Aït-Sahalia, Y. and Jacod, J. (2014). High-frequency financial econometrics.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bakshi, G., Cao, C. and Chen, Z. (1997). Empirical performance of alternative
option pricing models. Journal of Finance, 52 (5), 2003–2049.
Berestycki, H., Busca, J. and Florent, I. (2004). Computing the implied volatility
in stochastic volatility models. Communications on Pure and Applied
Mathematics, 57 (10), 1352–1373.
Bichuch, M. and Sircar, R. (2014). Optimal investment with transaction costs
and stochastic volatility. Submitted.
Black, F. and Scholes, M. (1972). The valuation of option contracts and a test of
market efficiency. Journal of Finance, 27, 399–417.
Black, F. and Scholes, M. (1973). The pricing of options and corporate
liabilities. The Journal of Political Economy, 81(3), 637–654.
Dong, Y. and Sircar, R. (2014). Time-inconsistent portfolio investment
problems. In Stochastic analysis and applications 2014 – in honour of Terry
Lyons (ed. Crisan, D. Hambly, B. and Zariphopoulou T.). Berlin: Springer.
Dupire, B. (1994). Pricing with a smile. Risk, 7 (1), 18–20.
Engle, R. (1982). Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with estimates of
the variance of United Kingdom inflation. Econometrica, 50 (4), 987–1008.
Fouque, J.-P., Papanicolaou, G. and Sircar, R. (2000). Derivatives in financial
markets with stochastic volatility. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fouque, J.-P., Papanicolaou, G., Sircar, R. and Solna, K. (2011). Multiscale
stochastic volatility for equity, interest rate, and credit derivatives. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Fouque, J.-P., Sircar, R. and Zariphopoulou, T. (2013). Portfolio optimization &
stochastic volatility asymptotics. Mathematical Finance, forthcoming.
Gulisashvili, A. (2012). Analytically tractable stochastic stock price models.
New York: Springer.
Heston, S. (1993). A closed-form solution for options with stochastic volatility
with applications to bond and currency options. Review of Financial Studies, 6
(2), 327–343.
Hull, J. and White, A. (1987). The pricing of options on assets with stochastic
volatilities. Journal of Finance, 42 (2), 281–300.
Jonsson, M. and Sircar, R. (2002a). Optimal investment problems and volatility
homogenization approximations. In Modern methods in scientific computing and
applications (ed. Bourlioux, A., Gander, M. and Sabidussi, G.), NATO Science
Series II vol. 75. New York: Kluwer, pp. 255–281.
Jonsson, M. and Sircar, R. (2002b). Partial hedging in a stochastic volatility
environment. Mathematical Finance, 12 (4), 375–409.
Kallsen, J. and Muhle-Karbe, J. (2013). The general structure of optimal
investment and consumption with small transaction costs. Submitted.
Lee, R.W. (2004). The moment formula for implied volatility at extreme strikes.
Mathematical Finance, 14 (3), 469–480.
Lewis, A. (2000). Option valuation under stochastic volatility. Newport Beach,
CA: Finance Press.
Lorig, M. and Lozano-Carbassé, O. (2015). Multiscale exponential Lévy models.
Quantitative Finance, 15 (1), 91–100.
Lorig, M., Pagliarani, S. and Pascucci, A. (2014). A Taylor series approach to
pricing and implied vol for LSV models. Journal of Risk, 17, 1–17.
Lorig, M., Pagliarani, S. and Pascucci, A. (2015a). Analytical expansions for
parabolic equations. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 75, 468–491.
Lorig, M., Pagliarani, S. and Pascucci, A. (2015b). Explicit implied volatilities
for multifactor local-stochastic volatility models. Mathematical Finance,
forthcoming.
Lorig, M., Pagliarani, S. and Pascucci, A. (2015c). A family of density
expansions for Lévy-type processes with default. Annals of Applied Probability,
25 (1), 235–267.
Lorig, M., Pagliarani, S. and Pascucci, A. (2015d). Pricing approximations and
error estimates for local Lévy-type models with default. Computers and
Mathematics with Applications, forthcoming.
Lorig, M. and Sircar, R. (2015). Portfolio optimization under local-stochastic
volatility: coefficient Taylor series approximations & implied Sharpe ratio.
Submitted.
Merton, R. (1976). Option pricing when underlying stock returns are
discontinuous. Journal of Financial Economics, 3 (1), 125–144.
Merton, R. (1992). Continuous-time finance. Oxford: Blackwell.
Merton, R.C. (1969). Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: the
continuous-time case. Review of Economics and Statistics, 51 (3), 247–257.
Merton, R.C. (1971). Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-
time model. Journal of Economic Theory, 3 (1–2), 373–413.
Nelson, D. (1990). ARCH models as diffusion approximations. Journal of
Econometrics, 45 (1–2), 7–38.
Nelson, D. (1991). Conditional heteroskedasticity in asset returns: a new
approach. Econometrica, 59 (2), 347–370.
Scott, L. (1987). Option pricing when the variance changes randomly: theory,
estimation, and an application. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis,
22 (4), 419–438.
Sircar, R. and T. Zariphopoulou (2005). Bounds and asymptotic approximations
for utility prices when volatility is random. SIAM Journal of Control and
Optimization, 43 (4), 1328–1353.
Tehranchi, M.R. (2009). Asymptotics of implied volatility far from maturity.
Journal of Applied Probability, 629–650.
Wiggins, J. (1987). Option values under stochastic volatility. Journal of
Financial Economics, 19 (2), 351–372.
Chapter 8
Statistical Measures of Dependence for
Financial Data
   David S. Matteson, Nicholas A. James and William B. Nicholson
   Cornell University, USA

8.1 Introduction
The analysis of financial and econometric data is typified by non-Gaussian
multivariate observations that exhibit complex dependencies: heavy-tailed and
skewed marginal distributions are commonly encountered; serial dependence,
such as autocorrelation and conditional heteroscedasticity, appear in time-
ordered sequences; and nonlinear, higher-order, and tail dependence are
widespread. Illustrations of serial dependence, nonnormality, and nonlinear
dependence are shown in Figure 8.1.
Figure 8.1 Top left: Strong and persistent positive autocorrelation, that is,
persistence in local level; top right: moderate volatility clustering, that is, i.e.,
persistence in local variation. Middle left: Right tail density estimates of
Gaussian versus heavy-or thick-tailed data; middle right: sample quantiles of
heavy-tailed data versus the corresponding quantiles of the Gaussian
distribution. Bottom left: Linear regression line fit to non-Gaussian data; right:
corresponding estimated density contours of the normalized sample ranks, which
show a positive association that is stronger in the lower left quadrant compared
to the upper right.
When data are assumed to be jointly Gaussian, all dependence is linear, and
therefore only pairwise among the variables. In this setting, Pearson's product-
moment correlation coefficient uniquely characterizes the sign and strength of
any such dependence.


  Definition 8.1
  For random variables and        with joint density   , Pearson's correlation
  coefficient is defined as




  where                             , and
                                           , are the mean and variance of    ,
  respectively, and    and     are defined similarly.

This conventional measure of pairwise linear association is well-defined
provided     and     are positive and finite, in which case                  .A
value of    or     indicates perfect negative or positive linear dependence,
respectively, and in either case and have an exact linear relationship.
Negative and positive values indicate negative and positive linear associations,
respectively, while a value of 0 indicates no linear dependence.
A sample estimator     is typically defined by replacing expectations with
empirical expectations in the above definition. For a paired random sample of
observations                        , define
where      and are defined similarly. For jointly Gaussian variables          , zero
correlation is equivalent to independence. For an independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) sample from the bivariate normal distribution, inference
regarding      can be conducted using the following asymptotic approximation:



in which denotes convergence in distribution. Under the null hypothesis of
zero correlation, this expression simplifies to                . More generally, for
an i.i.d sample from an arbitrary distribution with finite fourth moments,
and        , a variance-stabilizing transformation may be applied (Fisher's
transformation) to obtain the alternative asymptotic approximation (cf. Ferguson,
1996)




Although the previous approximation is quite general, assuming finite fourth
moments may be unreasonable in numerous financial applications where
extreme events are common. Furthermore, Pearson's correlation coefficient
measures the strength of linear relationships only. There are many situations in
which correlations are zero but a strong nonlinear relationship exists, such that
variables are highly dependent. In Section 8.2, we discuss several robust
measures of correlation and pairwise association, and illustrate their application
in measuring serial dependence in time-ordered data. In Section 8.3, we consider
multivariate extensions and Granger causality, and introduce measures of mutual
independence. Finally, in Section 8.4 we explore copulas and their financial
applications.

8.2 Robust Measures of Correlation and
Autocorrelation
Financial data are often time-ordered, and intertemporal dependence is
commonplace. The autocovariance and autocorrelation functions are extensions
of covariance and Pearson's correlation to a time-dependent setting, respectively.
  Definition 8.2
  For a univariate ordered sequence of random variables { }, the
  autocovariance and autocorrelation at indices and (Shumway and
  Stoffer, 2011) are defined as



  and




respectively, in which               and           . The above quantities are well-
defined provided         is finite for all ; however, estimating these quantities
from an observed sequence                    requires either multiple i.i.d.
realizations of the entire sequence (uncommon in finance), or some additional
assumptions. The first basic assumption is that the observations are equally
spaced, and denotes their discrete-time index. We will refer to such sequences
generically as time-series. In finance, this assumption may only hold
approximately. For example, a sequence of daily market closing asset prices may
only be available for weekdays, with additional gaps on holidays, or intraday
asset transaction prices may be reported every hundredth of a second, but there
may be no transaction at many of these times. In either case, the consecutive
observations are commonly regarded as equally spaced, for simplicity.
The next basic assumption is some form of distributional invariance over time,
such as stationarity.


  Definition 8.3
  A univariate sequence of random variables        is weakly (or covariance)
  stationary if and only if


  This implies that the means and variances are finite and constant, and the
  autocovariance is constant with respect to , and only depends on the
  relative time lag   between observations.
  For any -tuple of indices             , let           denote the joint
  distribution function of                . Then, the sequence is strictly
  stationary if and only if


  This implies that the joint distributions of all -tuples are invariant to a
  common time shift such that their relative time lags remain constant.
  Strict stationary implies weak stationarity provided the variance is also
  finite.

Now, under the weak stationarity assumption, the parameters                for
             denote the autocovariance function of        with respect to the time
lag , and the corresponding autocorrelation function (ACF) is defined as
             . Under the weak stationarity assumption, the joint distribution of the
random variables                has mean vector         , where denotes a length
   vector of ones, and a symmetric Toeplitz covariance matrix , with
                . Furthermore, both      and the corresponding correlation matrix
    are positive definite for any stationary sequence. For an observed stationary
time-series               , the mean is estimated as before      , while
autocovariances and autocorrelations are commonly estimated as
                            and                             , respectively. Using the
scaling as opposed to assures that the corresponding estimated covariance
and correlation matrices             and                  are both positive
definite (McLeod and Jimenéz, 1984).

8.2.1 Transformations and Rank-Based Methods
Pearson's correlation and the autocorrelation function are commonly interpreted
under an implicit joint normality assumption on the data. The alternative
measures discussed in this subsection offer robustness to outlying and extreme
observations and consider nonlinear dependencies, all of which are common in
financial data.

8.2.1.1 Huber-type Correlations
Transformations may be applied to define a robust correlation measure between
pairs of random variables       . For example, let  and    denote robust
location and scale parameters, such as the trimmed mean and trimmed standard
deviation. And let denote a bounded monotone function, such as
                           (cf. Huber, 1981), where is some positive constant
and is the indicator function of an event . Then, a robust covariance and
correlation may be defined as




and




respectively (cf. Maronna et al., 2006). Although these measures are robust to
outlying and extreme observations, they depend on the choice of transformation
  . They provide an intuitive measure of association, however, for an arbitrary
joint distribution on      ,                 , in general. Sample versions are
obtained by replacing the expectation,     and , by their sample estimates in
the above expressions. Asymptotic sampling distributions can be derived, but the
setting is more complicated than above. Finally, robust pairwise covariances and
correlations such as these may be used to define corresponding covariance and
correlation matrices for random vectors, but the result is not positive definite (or
affine equivariant), in general.

8.2.1.2 Kendall's Tau
Rank-based methods measure all monotonic relationships and are resistant to
outliers. Kendall's tau (Kendall, 1938) is a nonparametric measure of
dependence, for which the sample estimate considers the pairwise agreement
between two ranked lists.


  Definition 8.4
  For random variables     and    , Kendall's tau is defined as

                                                                              8.1
  in which          denotes an i.i.d. copy of      .

A sample estimator considers the pairwise agreement between two ranked
lists. For a paired random sample of observations                   , the
sample analog of (8.1) is defined as




and, in the absence of ties, is also equal to



in which a pair of observations             are concordant if
                      , and discordant otherwise. These definitions may also be
extended to define analogous autocorrelation functions.


  Definition 8.5
  The ACF based on Kendall's tau (Bingham and Schmidt, 2006) for a
  stationary sequence of random variables  is defined as

                                                                               8.2


  in which           denotes an i.d.d. copy of          .

For an observed time-series                , the sample analog of (8.2) is defined
as




which is not assured to have a corresponding estimated correlation matrix that is
positive definite.
In certain applications, Kendall's tau has a distinct advantage over Pearson's
correlation in that it is invariant to increasing monotonic transformations of one
or both variables. For example,                                    , for positive
random variables, and similarly for . Bingham and Schmidt (2006) consider an
example based on a time-series of squared asset returns, which exhibits
abnormally high dependence at a specific lag. This is exaggerated in a Pearson
ACF, as it only measures linear dependence. After applying a data
standardization, the magnitude of the Pearson ACF at this lag decreases
substantially, whereas the ACF based on Kendall's tau is very similar under both
specifications.
Figure 8.2 offers an example of a scenario in which the autocorrelation based on
Kendall's tau differs substantially from that produced from a Pearson ACF. It
depicts the Bank of America (BOA) stock price and the estimated ACF of the
squared daily stock returns from June 2008 to January 2009, a very volatile
period that included the failure of Lehman Brothers, Washington Mutual, and
several other financial institutions. The ACF based on Kendall's tau detects
persistent serial dependence across several lags, while the Pearson ACF detects
dependence only at the first and 10th lags. This discrepancy suggests that the
underlying serial dependence is highly nonlinear and non-Gaussian in nature.
Figure 8.2 Bank of America (BOA) daily closing stock price. Bottom:
Standardized (Fisher's transformation) ACF based on Kendall's tau and Pearson's
correlation coefficient for the squared daily stock returns.

8.2.1.3 Spearman's Rho
One of the shortcomings of Kendall's tau, as discussed in Helsel and Hirsch
(1992), is that since it is purely based on sign, the magnitude of concordance or
discordance is not taken into account. Spearman's rho (Spearman, 1904), which
computes Pearson's correlation on the normalized ranks in the sample case, does
explicitly take magnitude into account. Though Kendall's tau and Spearman's rho
are asymptotically equivalent when testing for independence, Spearman's rho
can be preferable in certain scenarios. For example, Xu et al. (2013) conduct a
simulation study with bivariate contaminated normal data and conclude that
Spearman's rho is preferable to Kendall's tau in small sample sizes when the
population correlation is moderate.
  Definition 8.6
  The ACF based on Spearman's rho (Hollander and Wolfe, 1999) for a
  stationary sequence of random variables with common marginal
  distribution is defined as


  that is, the Pearson correlation of     and         .

For an observed time-series               , a sample version may be defined as




in which                        .

8.2.2 Inference
8.2.2.1 Kendall's Tau
We can test the hypothesis of zero correlation, that is,


with the decision rule:                        , in which      can be computed
from a table of critical values. For larger sample sizes, a normal approximation
may be utilized on a standardized version of




where        and          represent the respective mean and variance of under
the null hypothesis of independence. Under serial independence, Ferguson et al.
(2000) derive




The variance is derived in the case where        as
A formula for a general lag    (assuming        ) is constructed by Šiman (2012)
as:




It was additionally shown in Ferguson et al. (2000) that    is asymptotically
standard normal and independent across lags .

8.2.2.2 Spearman's Rho
When     is large, we consider Fisher's transformation of Spearman's rho




to test the hypothesis


The corresponding test statistic is              . Per Anderson (1954), the
standard error of is approximated as                    , and can be
compared to the standard normal distribution.


  Example 8.1
  To illustrate a setting in which rank-based measures are more informative
  than Pearson's correlation coefficient, we consider data simulated from a
  cubic moving average model (adapted from Ashley and Patterson, 2001). Let



  Clearly, there is serial dependence at lag    , but it is nonlinear in nature.

We consider three distributions for the mean zero i.i.d. innovations :
standard normal; Student's distribution with 5 degrees of freedom (hence,
heavy tails); and a stable Pareto distribution with shape parameter    ,
which has characteristic function                     . The choice of    is
believed by Fama (1965) to adequately capture the leptokurtic nature of US
stock returns. From its construction, it is clear that the second moment of this
distribution does not exist. One simulation from each process is shown in Figure
8.3. At each iteration, 1000 observations were drawn from each model and the
lag-1 correlations were tested under the hypotheses stated in this chapter. This
process was repeated 5000 times, and the results are summarized in Table 8.1.




Figure 8.3 Realized time-series simulated from each of the three process models
discussed in Example 8.1.
Table 8.1 Percentage of tests failing to reject    of no lag-1 correlation
                  Error distribution Pearson Kendall Spearman
                  Standard normal 0.00         0         0
                  Student's           0.13     0         0
                  Stable Pareto       0.53     0         0
These simulations provide evidence to support the claim that Pearson's
correlation coefficient is robust to nonlinearity, but performs poorly in the
correlation coefficient is robust to nonlinearity, but performs poorly in the
presence of leptokurtic distributions and outliers. Hence, one should be judicious
in measuring and testing autocorrelation, especially when working with data
exhibiting these characteristics.

8.2.3 Misspecification Testing
8.2.3.1 Ljung–Box Test
Assuming a time-series        is i.i.d. with finite variance, it has no
autocorrelation at any lag, that is,           for all     . Additionally,       is
asymptotically        , and                   are asymptotically independent. Thus,
we can perform a joint test with the hypotheses


This hypothesis is often tested on the residuals of a fitted time-series model. For
example, consider the residuals       from an autoregressive moving average
[ARMA(p,q)] model. Either the Ljung–Box statistic              (Ljung and Box,
1978) or the Box–Pierce statistic        (Box and Pierce, 1970), which are
asymptotically equivalent, can be used:

                                                                                8.3

The null hypothesis is rejected at significance level if the statistic exceeds the
      quantile of the        distribution. Per Lai and Xing (2008), simulation
studies suggest that the Ljung–Box statistic is better approximated by a
than the Box–Pierce statistic, hence it is preferred for small to moderate-sized
samples. Analogous joint tests are formed for both        and       by leveraging
the asymptotic normality and independence across lags by applying similar
transformations.

8.2.3.2 Conditional Heteroscedasticity
Traditionally, the Ljung–Box test is performed on the residuals of a linear or
conditional mean for a given series. However, in financial applications,
conditional variance (also known as volatility), as opposed to conditional mean,
is often a primary parameter of interest. Per Tsay (2010), in many financial
applications, a daily asset return series             generally is either serially
uncorrelated or has minor correlations that can be accounted for with a low-order
ARMA model. However, substantial autocorrelation may exist in the squared
return series    , and the volatility    sequence is the focus of modeling. The
autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity (ARCH) model and its
generalization are popular models for forecasting volatility.


  Definition 8.7
  Let     denote the innovations from a return series centered by its
  conditional mean (e.g., ARMA) equation. Then, the autoregressive
  conditional heteroscedasticity model of order (          model) is defined
  as




  in which      represents a sequence of i.i.d. standardized innovations (Engle,
  1982).

Normal random variables are commonly used for , but other asymmetric and
heavy-tailed distributions, such as a standardized skewed Student's , can be
substituted. The volatility equation intercept is positive, and the coefficients
          are constrained to be nonnegative and sum to less than one to ensure
positivity of      and stationarity of        . The ARCH model was
generalized to allow for a more parsimonious representation when is large.


  Definition 8.8
  The generalized ARCH model (              ) for     is defined as above, but
  with




  with       ,        for positivity, and                    for stationarity
  (Bollerslev, 1986).
8.2.3.3 Parametric Tests for ARCH Effects
Observations from an ARCH or GARCH process are dependent. In particular,
the sequence of squared observations               have autocorrelation, which is
referred to as ARCH effects. Perhaps the most straightforward test for ARCH
effects is the McLeod–Li test, which simply computes the Ljung–Box statistic
(8.3) on the squared innovations (or on squared residuals ), in place of the
innovations . It was shown in McLeod and Li (1983) that under the null
hypothesis of independent observations, for fixed , the scaled correlations
                            are asymptotically normally distributed with mean
zero and identity covariance matrix. The McLeod–Li statistic is then computed
as




which is asymptotically      distributed under   , and no adjustment is needed
when       is replaced by     .
A popular alternative to test for ARCH effects is the Lagrange multiplier test of
Engle (1982). Per Tsay (2010), the test is equivalent to using a standard -
statistic to conduct the joint test that all   in the regression equation

                                                                                  8.4
where    is a prespecified lag order. The hypotheses are


To calculate the -statistic, first define                      , where
               , and                   , where    represents the residuals from
(8.4). The -statistic is then defined as

                                                                                  8.5

which is also asymptotically      distributed under   (Luukkonen et al., 1988).
Another test developed by Tsay (1986) specifically looks for quadratic serial
dependence by incorporating cross-product terms. Let
                                       . Then, consider the regression
where is a             coefficients vector and is a              coefficients
vector. If the AR(p) model is adequate, then should be zero. This can be tested
using a standard -statistic similar to (8.5), but with
                                degrees of freedom.

8.2.3.4 Nonparametric Tests for the ARCH Effect
The BDS test (Brock et al., 1996) originated as a test for the detection of
nonrandom chaotic dynamics, but has gained traction as a test for nonlinear
serial dependence in financial time-series. The BDS test is based on a correlation
integral. To construct a correlation integral for a series            , define a
sequence of -vectors as                            , in which is the embedding
dimension. The correlation integral measures the fraction of pairs of -vectors
that are close to each other (given some range parameter        ). As described in
Patterson and Ashley (2000), it counts the number of -vectors that lie within a
hypercube of size of each other.


  Definition 8.9
  An empirical correlation integral of order     and range          is

                                                                             8.6

  in which               , and           is one if              for
               , and zero otherwise.

Under the null hypothesis of serial independence, the correlation integral
factorizes as             . Correlation integrals are -statistics, so asymptotic
theory can readily be applied. The BDS test statistic is defined in Zivot and
Wang (2007) as




where      is an estimate of the asymptotic standard deviation of             , as
derived in Brock et al. (1996).
Under mild regularity conditions, the BDS statistic converges in distribution to a
standard normal distribution, though convergence can be very slow. As stated in
Patterson and Ashley (2000), convergence for large requires an extremely
large sample size. The null hypothesis of i.i.d. data is rejected if            . Per
Diks (2009), the range parameter is typically set to 0.5 to 1.5 times the sample
standard deviation of the observed series. In practice, the test is constructed for
several values of , which are then compared against one another as a stability
check. As an alternative to relying on asymptotic normality, Genest et al. (2007)
developed a rank-based extension of the BDS test whose finite sample p-values
can be constructed by simulation.
The BDS test also functions as a model misspecification test. Brock et al. (1996)
shows that the asymptotic distribution of the test statistic for residuals is the
same as that of true innovations. Similar to the aforementioned parametric tests,
it is often performed on the residuals of a fitted model in order to test for any
remaining dependence. However, as pointed out by Diks (2009), though this
holds for autoregressive models, it does not hold for models in the ARCH
family. While it is not free of nuisance parameters for GARCH models, Caporale
et al. (2005) found the BDS test to perform very well on the logged squared
residuals of a GARCH(1,1) model.

8.2.3.5 Comparative Performance of Misspecification Tests
Ashley and Patterson (2001) conducted a simulation study of the BDS, Mcleod–
Li, Tsay, Lagrange multiplier, and several other tests over a wide variety of data-
generating processes. They found that the BDS test has the highest power
against all alternatives, rendering it very useful as a so-called nonlinearity
screening test, which can detect any residual nonlinear serial dependence.
However, it is not informative as to the type of nonlinear structure that may be
present in the observations. The Tsay test was also found to perform well in the
detection of self-excited threshold autoregression models.

8.3 Multivariate Extensions
The vector autoregression (VAR) is the multivariate analog of the autoregressive
model. It allows simultaneous and dynamic linear dependence across multiple
components.


  Definition 8.10
  A   th order vector autoregression is defined as

                                                                              8.7
  in which       ,           for all ; each    is a     coefficient matrix;
  and is a serially uncorrelated weakly stationary sequence (white noise)
  with mean vector zero and nonsingular       covariance matrix .


8.3.1 Multivariate Volatility
The vector autoregression (8.7) operates under the assumption that the
innovations are white noise, but it allows for nonlinear serial dependence. Such
dependence is common in financial data, particularly multivariate ARCH effects.
In this case, we may decompose the linear and nonlinear dynamics as



in which    denotes the conditional mean given the past observations
                (possibly estimated with a VAR); and represents an i.i.d
sequence with mean zero and identity covariance. As with the univariate ARCH
case, we want to consider processes in which the conditional covariance matrix
   is dependent across time, where                                             .
As outlined in Tsay (2014), there are many challenges in multivariate volatility
modeling. The dimension of increases quadratically with , and restrictions
are needed to ensure is positive definite for all .
One way to model multivariate volatility is to extend the conventional GARCH
models to a multivariate setting. A simple approach is to model a half-
vectorization (vech) of the diagonal and lower triangle elements of .


  Definition 8.11
  The VECH GARCH model (Bollerslev et al., 1992) for a -dimensional
  series has volatility defined by the recursion
  in which    is a      symmetric, positive definite matrix; and the coefficient
  matrices    and     each have dimension                       .

As stated in Jondeau et al. (2007), this model requires estimating on the order of
  parameters, and it is difficult to incorporate restrictions that guarantee the
conditional covariances      will be positive definite.
One popular model that addresses some of these concerns is the Baba, Engle,
Kraft, and Kroner (BEKK) representation.


  Definition 8.12
  The BEKK GARCH model (Engle and Kroner, 1995) for a -dimensional
  series has volatility defined by the recursion




  in which    is a      symmetric, positive definite matrix; and the coefficient
  matrices     and    each have dimension       .

The major advantage of this model is that is positive definite as long as is
positive definite and the sequence is initialized at positive definite values.
Estimation includes                       parameters. In certain cases, to reduce
the computational burden, the matrices       and are assumed to be diagonal.
However, the BEKK model does not scale well, even in the diagonal case; the
number of parameters grows quadratically with the number of variables. For
additional model structures, the interested reader can consult Bauwens et al.
(2006), which conducts a comprehensive survey of multivariate volatility
models.

8.3.2 Multivariate Misspecification Testing
Many univariate misspecification tests have multivariate extensions. Referencing
Equation (8.7), the lagged cross-covariance matrices of     can be estimated as
Let denote a diagonal matrix with                   , then the lagged cross-
correlation matrices of can be estimated as



The Ljung–Box test was extended to a multivariate setting by Baillie and
Bollerslev (1990), to test the hypotheses


The test statistic recommended by Lütkepohl (2007) is




which asymptotically follows a       distribution under . For residuals
from an estimated          model, the     are defined analogously, as is
, which instead has a         asymptotic distribution under . Furthermore,
analogous hypotheses and tests can be conducted for the multivariate version of
the ARCH effect based on        ,    , or     , where           , for an
estimated volatility sequence     .

8.3.3 Granger Causality
In financial applications, it is widely believed (cf. Gallant et al., 1992) that the
joint dynamics of stock prices and trading volume can be more informative as to
the underlying state of the stock market than stock prices alone. Many studies
have explicitly tested for a causal link between stock prices and trading volume.
The notion of Granger causality, developed by Granger (1969), can be used to
determine whether one time-series helps to predict another. As a simple
example, consider a bivariate time-series              specified by the equations




where                   . The series   is said to “Granger-cause”     if       .
More generally, given a prespecified lag length    , consider the marginal model
for    defined by

                                                                                   8.8
To test for Granger causality, we may test the hypotheses



As a test statistic, one can use the sum of squared residuals from (8.8)




which can then be compared with the sum of squared residuals from a univariate
autoregression of   , for example,




Then a   -statistic is constructed as

                                                                                   8.9

which is asymptotically distributed as             under . There are several
additional methods to test for Granger causality, but simulation studies by
Geweke et al. (1983) suggest that (8.9) achieves the best performance. For an
overview of additional tests, the interested reader is referred to Chapter 11 of
Hamilton (1994).

8.3.4 Nonlinear Granger Causality
The aforementioned test for Granger causality will only elucidate whether
can help to predict    linearly. Potential nonlinear relationships will remain
undetected. Consider the following example, procured from Baek and Brock
(1992),



There exists an obvious but nonlinear relationship that will not be evident in
Granger causality testing. In a similar fashion to the BDS test, Baek and Brock
(1992) develop a test for nonlinear Granger causality based on the correlation
integral (8.6).


  Definition 8.13 (Nonlinear Granger Causality)
       does not nonlinearly Granger-cause         if:


  in which                   . In words: “Given and , q lags of Y do not
  incrementally help to predict next period's value given p lags of X.”

The notion of nonlinear Granger causality has been extensively developed to
analyze relationships in finance. In particular, Hiemstra and Jones (1994)
examine the relationship between aggregate stock prices and trading volume.
They expand upon Baek and Brock (1992) and give a detailed description of a
hypothesis test (henceforth, the H-J test).
Under the null hypothesis of the H-J test, it is assumed that    does not
nonlinearly Granger cause      . This is determined by testing conditional
independence using finite lags and :



where                         and,                        . Assuming the bivariate
time-series         is strictly stationary, the H-J test can be interpreted as a
statement about the invariant distribution of the                 dimensional random
vector                    , where           . For notational ease, we will drop the
time index and refer to this vector as                . Under the null hypothesis, the
joint probability density function                and its marginals must satisfy:

                                                                                 8.10

for every         in the support of         . Correlation integrals are used to
measure the discrepancies between the left and right sides of (8.10). Given     ,
the correlation integral for a multivariate random vector is the probability of
finding two independent realizations of the vector V: and , at a distance less
than or equal to , that is,


This leads to the test case:
                                                                                8.11

It is then estimated via the sample analog:

                                                                                8.12

However, as shown in Diks and Panchenko (2006), in certain situations this test
tends to reject too often under the null hypothesis of no Granger causality. Diks
and Panchenko (2006) show that the test statistic used in Hiemstra and Jones
(1994) is biased and converges to a nonzero limit, while the variance decreases
to zero, which will generate significant values for the test statistic as the length
of the series increases. An important instance in which this occurs i between two
series with independent ARCH effects.
Instead, Diks and Panchenko (2006) construct a new test statistic that measures
dependence between X and Z given         locally for each . Define the local
density estimator as:




where                       . The test statistic can then be expressed as:




The test is shown to be consistent for                , and bandwidth chosen as:



for any       and           . Details of derivation for the optimal choice of are
discussed in Diks and Panchenko (2006). The authors then show that under these
conditions, the test is asymptotically normally distributed:




where                                           ; and is an autocorrelation
robust estimate of the asymptotic variance. They repeat the empirical study of
Hiemstra and Jones (1994) and find weaker evidence of nonlinear Granger
causality between S&P 500 returns and volume.

8.4 Copulas
Suppose that we have two random variables and , which we use to create the
random vector               . Then the joint distribution of can be decomposed
into two parts, one that only depends on the marginal distributions       and
      , and another that is only associated with the dependence between and .
The latter is referred to as the copula. More formally, we have the following
definition.


  Definition 8.14 (Sklar's Theorem (Sklar, 1959))
  Let    and be continuous random variables with marginal distributions
  and    . Furthermore, let and be uniform random variables such that
             and          . We then define the copula of     as the joint
  distribution of     .

One way to model the dependence between two random variables is through the
use of a copula. As can be seen from Definition 8.15, a copula is a multivariate
distribution for which all marginal distributions are uniform. Thus, copulas are a
natural tool for modeling dependence between two random variables since we
can ignore the effects of their marginal distributions. For instance, we can
express Kendall's tau and Spearman's rho coefficients in terms of the copula.


  Theorem 8.1
  Let   and be continuous random variables with copula . Then, if we let
        and         represent their corresponding Kendall's tau and
  Spearman's rho coefficients, we have the following equations:
  Proof
  The proof for these equalities can be found in Embrechts et al. (2003).

Below are some useful notes regarding copulas.
                      .
              and            .
   For all                and                , we have that


   which implies that     is increasing in both variables.
   Copulas satisfy the following Lipschitz condition:


8.4.1 Fitting Copula Models
There are numerous methods for fitting a copula model to data, including
parametric, semiparametric, and nonparametric (Choroś et al., 2010; Kim et al.,
2007). Suppose we wish to fit bivariate data             to a copula . In many
cases, it is more natural to work on the density scale and with the corresponding
copula density. The copula density is obtained through differentiating the
copula , yielding the following relation between the joint density          and
marginal densities and :


First, suppose that we believe the marginal distributions and copula to belong to
known families that can be indexed by parameters         , and respectively.
Since we are selecting a model from a known family, we can select the best
model through maximum likelihood. For this, we select             so as to
maximize




The typical maximum likelihood approach would attempt to estimate       , and
  all at once. However, the inference function for margins (IFM) method of Joe
(1997) estimates the parameters in sequence. First, the parameters for the
marginal distributions are estimated to obtain and . Then, these estimates
are used to estimate , which maximizes




The IFM method has a significant computational advantage to maximum
likelihood estimation, and Joe (1997) shows that it is almost as efficient as
maximum likelihood estimation in most cases.
If, however, the model is misspecified because of an incorrect marginal model
choice, then the maximum likelihood estimates may lose their efficiency, and
may in fact not be consistent (Kim et al., 2007). For this reason, semiparametric
approaches have also been suggested for fitting copula models. In this setting,
we usually have enough data to make accurate inferences about the marginal
distributions, but not enough to easily model the intervariable dependence. Thus,
we will assume that the copula belongs to a family that can be indexed by
parameter , while no specification about the marginals is made. The approach
taken by Genest et al. (1995) fits the marginal distributions by using the
empirical distribution function to get estimates     and . Then, the fitted
copula is selected so as to have parameter , which maximizes




In Genest et al. (1995), it is shown that the estimate is consistent and
asymptotically normal. Furthermore, approaches to estimate the variance of the
   estimator are also presented.
Finally, there are nonparametric approaches that can be used to fit copula
models. Unlike the marginals, the copula is a hidden model, and thus selecting
an appropriate parametric model is difficult. Thus, employing nonparametric
methods is a natural choice. In this setting, many approaches fit the copula itself
instead of the density because of increased rates of convergence. The natural
starting point is to work with the empirical copula process:




For the case where    is the independence copula, Deheuvels (1979) shows
consistency and asymptotic normality for the empirical copula; whereas
Fermanian et al. (2004) show consistency for a more general class of copulas, as
well as consistency when using kernel functions to approximate the copula.
However, when using kernel approaches, care must be taken when dealing with
the boundary, so as to reduce the effect of boundary bias associated with kernels.
This issue has been addressed through the use of locally linear kernels in Chen
and Huang (2007).

8.4.2 Parametric Copulas
The simplest copula to work with is the product copula             . This
corresponds to the random variables and being independent, and thus is
also commonly referred to as the independence copula. Other popular copulas
include the Gaussian, t, and Archimedean copulas. The Gaussian copula and
some Archimedean copulas include the independence copula as a special case.
Additionally, the t copula contains the independence copula as a limiting case.
If the vector       has a bivariate normal distribution, then all of the dependence
between and is captured by the correlation matrix . Thus, the copulas for
bivariate normal random vectors can be parameterized by their correlation
matrix,        . The copulas that are created in such a manner are called
Gaussian copulas. If the random vector           has a Gaussian copula, then it is
said to have a meta-Gaussian distribution; this is because it is not required that
the univariate marginal distributions be normal. For a given correlation matrix,
  , the Gaussian copula's density,         , is given by




where       is the standard normal quantile function and is the two-dimensional
identity matrix. Fitting this copula to a given dataset can be accomplished by
using any of the techniques of Section 8.4.1. In this case, we can also directly
estimate the correlation matrix by using Kendall's tau or Spearman's rho. Using
Kendall's tau, we have the following estimate for the correlation matrix:

                                                                                8.13

where                        . Once this calculation has been carried out, we can
either directly use this estimate of , or use the estimate as a starting value for
maximum likelihood or pseudo-maximum likelihood estimation. A similar
relation exists for Spearman's rho and can be found in Ruppert (2015).
In a similar fashion, we can define a copula that is based upon the bivariate t-
distribution. This distribution is completely described by its correlation matrix
along with a shape parameter . The parameter affects both the marginal
distributions as well as the dependence, and must thus be included in the copula
parameterization,           . A random vector that has a t-copula is said to have a
t-meta distribution.
Regardless of which approach we choose to employ to fit the model, there is a
relatively simple way to obtain an estimate of the correlation matrix, and it
closely resembles that used for the Gaussian copula. Using Equation 8.13, we
obtain a matrix that we refer to as      . There is a chance that the matrix     is
not positive definite because it has nonpositive eigenvalues. In this case, we have
that                , where      is a diagonal matrix of eigenvalue and is an
orthogonal matrix of the corresponding eigenvectors. To obtain positive
eigenvalues, we transform        to      by                    for some small
positive constant . Then                    is a positive definite matrix; however,
its diagonal entries may not be equal to one. To fix this, we multiply the th row
and column by            . After performing these steps, we are left with a true
correlation matrix . We can then estimate the shape parameter by holding
constant and maximizing the following equation:




The final class of copulas we will discuss are Archimedean copulas. This class
of copula provides modeling characteristics that are not available with either the
Gaussian or t-copulas.


  Definition 8.15
  A copula      is said to be Archimedean if it has the following representation:


  where                    is a function, called the generator, with the following
  properties;
      1.     is a decreasing convex function.
       2.         and          .

Depending on the choice of generator, we are able to model a wide array of
dependencies. For instance, the Frank copula can be obtained by selecting




with        . The choice of generator gives the following copula:




By noting that                  , we have that as approaches 0, the Frank
copula converges to the independence copula; whereas as           , we obtain the
copula for the random vector           ,                        , which is the
copula for perfect negative dependence. Similarly, as       , we obtain the
copula for the random vector       , which has perfect positive dependence,
                 .
Now let us consider the generator                    for      . This gives the
Gumbel copula



Selecting      results in the independence copula. Also, note that as        , the
Gumbel copula converges to the copula for perfect positive dependence.
However, unlike the Frank copula, the Gumbel copula is unable to model
negative dependence.
Table 8.2 contains some additional examples of Archimedean copulas along
with their generators.
Table 8.2 A table of common Archimedean copulas
Copula                                                               Range
Clayton
Ali–Mikhail–
Haq
Joe
8.4.3 Extending beyond Two Random Variables
So far, we have only seen how to model the dependence between two random
variables. Naturally, we would also like to model dependence between
random variables. In this case, our copula would be a function                    .
However, some difficulties arise when trying to extend the tools for creating
bivariate copulas to multivariate settings. For instance, Genest et al. (1995) show
that if is a bivariate copula and                ,            are multivariate
marginal distributions, then the only copula that satisfies
                                      is the independence copula.
Because of these difficulties, we will only be considering ways to extend
Archimedean copulas, as these extensions still remain relatively easy to analyze.
More specifically, we will consider the exchangeable Archimedean copula
(EAC), nested Archimedean copula (NAC), and pair copula construction (PCC).
To start, we consider the simplest extension, EACs. As with the bivariate
Archimedean copula, these are tied to a generating function . In this case, we
have that



This extension, however, comes at the cost of a greater restriction on the
generator . This restriction is -monotonic; see McNeil and Nešlehová (2009)
for more information.
NACs provide more flexibility than EACs because they allow for the
combination of different types of bivariate copulas to obtain higher order
copulas. The bivariate copulas are combined hierarchically and thus allow for a
convenient graphical representation. Figure 8.4 shows a graphical representation
for fully and partially nested Archimedean copulas in the case of four variables.
As can be seen from Figure 8.4, NACs only allow one to model             copulas.
Thus, all other possible interactions are predefined by the hierarchical structure.
For instance, in the partially nested structure, both       and        are
modeled by                   . Fitting a general NAC can be done with maximum
likelihood, but in general this must be done recursively and becomes extremely
computationally intensive as the number of variables increases. Similarly,
sampling from such copulas is also a difficult task (Aas and Berg,2009), but in
the case of fully and partially nested models Hofert (2010) presents algorithms
that are efficient for sampling any number of variables.
Figure 8.4 Tree representation of the fully nested (left) and partially nested
(right) Archimedean copula construction. Leaf nodes represent uniform random
variables, while the internal and root nodes represent copulas. Edges indicate
which variables or copulas are used in the creation of a new copula.
We finally consider PCCs, which like NACs are created by a hierarchical
process. The most popular types of PCCs are canonical vines and drawable
vines, commonly referred to as C-vines and D-vines, respectively. For both C-
and D-vines, there exist analytic expressions for the densities; see Czado (2010).
Thus, both models can be fit by maximum likelihood; however, as with NACs,
this must be done in a recursive fashion and can thus be computationally
expensive. Unlike NACs, drawing samples from PCCs is much simpler (Aas and
Berg, 2009). Furthermore, using PCCs, we are able to model all
copulas, which is not possible when using NAC extensions. Figure 8.5 shows the
graphical representations of C-and D-vines on four variables.
Figure 8.5 Graphical representation of the C-vine (left) and D-vine (right)
Archimedean copula construction. Leaf nodes labeled represent uniform
random variables, whereas nodes labeled      represent the th copula at the th
level. Edges indicate which variables or copulas are used in the creation of a new
copula.

8.4.4 Software
There are a number of software packages to choose from when working with
copulas. Here, we mention a few for working with copulas in R. All of these
packages are designed to perform statistical inference of various copula models.
They also all have methods for performing model estimation and random
sampling. The copula package (Hofert et al., 2014) works with elliptical,
Archimedean, and a few other copula families. VineCopula (Schepsmeier et al.,
2012) is designed to perform analysis of vine copulas, while CDVine
(Brechmann and Schepsmeier, 2013) is specialized for C-and D-vines.

8.5 Types of Dependence
In Section 8.4, we showed that copulas can be used to model the dependence
between random variables. We now turn our attention to the dependence
structure itself, and when appropriate make connections to copulas. We first
describe different types of dependence, and then provide theoretical background.
When dealing with only two random variables, the concept of positive and
negative dependence is more straightforward. Suppose that we have random
variables and , then positive dependence means that an increase/decrease in
the value of is likely to accompany an increase/decrease in the value of .
However, if and are negatively dependent, then an increase/decrease in
is likely to be accompanied by a decrease/increase in .

8.5.1 Positive and Negative Dependence
We now examine ways to extend the notion of positive and negative dependence
to more than two random variables. In this section, we will use the following
notation; if       , we say that      if        for all            .
In the bivariate case, the random vector               is positively dependent if
all of its components tend to move in the same direction. However, when        ,
there are many different interpretations.


  Definition 8.16
  A random vector                  is positive upper orthant dependent if for all


                                                                             8.14


  Similarly, if

                                                                             8.15


  we say that     is positive lower orthant dependent.

If we generalize the concept of an orthant, we obtain another form of positive
dependence.


  Definition 8.17
  A set is called an upper set if       and       implies that       . The
  complement of an upper set is called a lower set.
It should be noted that since the lower orthant is not the complement of the
upper orthant, it is not a lower set. Then, the concept of positive upper/lower set
dependence can be easily expressed using inequalities similar to those in
Equations 8.14 and 8.15.


  Definition 8.18
  A random vector                  is said to be positive upper set dependent, or
  positive lower set dependent, if



  and



  respectively, where     are upper sets and     are lower sets.

Unlike positive dependence, the concept of negative dependence is not as easily
extended to multiple random variables. For instance, it is impossible for more
than two random variables to have perfect negative dependence. To see this,
suppose that has perfect negative dependence with and ; this would
imply that and are positively dependent.
One way to obtain a type of negative dependence is by reversing the inequalities
in Equations 8.14 and 8.15. This results in what are called negative upper orthant
and negative lower orthant dependence, respectively. However, conditions under
which these inequalities hold are difficult to show when      . One such
condition, based upon the behavior of the multinomial distribution, is given by
Block et al. (1982).
The versions of positive and negative dependence for multiple random variables
presented here are elementary. There are notions of positive/negative association
that are related to the covariance structure, as well as other less intuitive
concepts such as setwise dependence. Further details about these and other types
of dependence can be found in the book by Drouet Mari and Kotz (2001).

8.5.2 Tail Dependence
One type of dependence that we will discuss in more detail has major
applications in finance. Tail dependence describes how likely it is that a set of
random variables will simultaneously take on extreme values. For instance,
when working with a portfolio, tail dependence provides information on how
likely it is to observe large, simultaneous losses from a portfolio's assets.
Suppose that we have random variables and with distributions           and ,
respectively, and let       . In the most basic case, upper tail dependence is
concerned with the following quantity:

                                                                                8.16

where      is the copula for     and    . Similarly, lower tail dependence is
concerned with the quantity

                                                                                8.17

Let us assume that the variables and measure the amount lost from the
components of a two-asset portfolio. We then say that and are
asymptotically independent if               exists and is equal to zero.
Otherwise, we say that and are asymptotically dependent. Poon et al.
(2004) provide a nonparametric method for estimating the value of , as well as
a way to measure upper tail dependence even if and are asymptotically
independent. They also demonstrate the impact of knowing whether variables
are asymptotically dependent or independent on the conclusions drawn from
statistical analyses.
We now turn our attention to the type of dependence that is under consideration
in Equation 8.17. As with Equation 8.16, we will say that and are
asymptotically independent if                exists and is equal to zero, and
asymptotically dependent if the limit exists and is nonzero. As mentioned by
Schmid and Schmidt (2007), one issue with this method is that it only examines
values along the diagonal of the copula. Thus, the quantity




might have a different limit as    than . For this reason, Schmid and
Schmidt (2007) propose the following measure of tail dependence, which is
closely related to Spearman's rho:
                                                                             8.18

The measures discussed so far have only been for bivariate processes; however,
in financial cases, multivariate approaches are typically more applicable.
Extensions to higher dimensions are rather simple for Equations 8.16 and 8.17,
requiring only a change in the set of variables over which we condition and those
for which we wish to find the probability of observing an extreme event. Schmid
and Schmidt (2007) provide a general multivariate version of Equation 8.18.
Financial applications are typically multivariate and consider a portfolio of
assets rather than individual assets. Such portfolios may exhibit complex
dependencies and evolutions. The methods described in this chapter allow robust
analysis of non-Gaussian and time-series data, and provide intuitive and
tractable tools for multivariate data. They also make relatively weak assumptions
about the underlying dependence structure to maintain broad applicability for
financial data analysis.

References
Aas, K. and Berg, D. (2009). Models for construction of multivariate
dependence: a comparison study. The European Journal of Finance, 15(7–8),
639–659.
Anderson, T.W. (1954). An introduction to multivariate statistical analysis. New
York: John Wiley & Sons.
Ashley, R.A. and Patterson, D.M. (2001). Nonlinear model
specification/diagnostics: insights from a battery of nonlinearity tests.
Economics Department Working Paper E99-05. Blacksburg, VA: Virginia Tech.
Baek, E. and Brock, W. (1992). A general test for nonlinear granger causality:
Bivariate model. Working Paper. Ames and Madison: Iowa State University and
University of Wisconsin at Madison.
Baillie, R.T. and Bollerslev, T. (1990). A multivariate generalized arch approach
to modeling risk premia in forward foreign exchange rate markets. Journal of
International Money and Finance, 9(3), 309–324.
Bauwens, L., Laurent, S. and Rombouts, J.V. (2006). Multivariate GARCH
models: a survey. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 21(1), 79–109.
Bingham, N.H. and Schmidt R (2006). Interplay between distributional and
temporal dependence: an empirical study with high-frequency asset returns. In
From stochastic calculus to mathematical finance. Berlin: Springer, pp. 69–90.
Block, H.W., Savits, T.H., Shaked, M., et al. (1982). Some concepts of negative
dependence. The Annals of Probability, 10(3), 765–772.
Bollerslev, T. (1986). Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity.
Journal of Econometrics, 31(3), 307–327.
Bollerslev, T., Chou, R.Y. and Kroner, K.F. (1992). Arch modeling in finance.
Journal of Econometrics, 52, 5–59.
Box, G.E. and Pierce, D.A. (1970). Distribution of residual autocorrelations in
autoregressive-integrated moving average time series models. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 65(332), 1509–1526.
Brechmann, E.C. and Schepsmeier, U. (2013). Modeling dependence with c-and
d-vine copulas: The R package CDVine. Journal of Statistical Software, 52(3),
1–27.
Brock, W., Scheinkman, J.A., Dechert, W.D. and LeBaron, B. (1996). A test for
independence based on the correlation dimension. Econometric Reviews, 15(3),
197–235.
Caporale, G.M., Ntantamis, C., Pantelidis, T. and Pittis, N. (2005). The BDS test
as a test for the adequacy of a GARCH (1, 1) specification: a Monte Carlo study.
Journal of Financial Econometrics, 3(2), 282–309.
Chen, S.X. and Huang, T.M. (2007). Nonparametric estimation of copula
functions for dependence modelling. Canadian Journal of Statistics, 35(2), 265–
282.
Chorós, B., Ibragimov, R. and Permiakova, E. (2010). Copula estimation. In
Copula theory and its applications (ed. Jaworski P, Durante F, Hrdle WK and
Rychlik T). Lecture Notes in Statistics. Berlin: Springer pp. 77–91.
Czado, C. (2010). Pair-copula constructions of multivariate copulas. In Copula
theory and its applications (ed. Jaworski P, Durante F, Hrdle WK and Rychlik
T). Lecture Notes in Statistics. Berlin: Springer pp. 93–109.
Deheuvels, P. (1979). La fonction de dépendance empirique et ses propriétés: un
test non paramétrique d'indépendance. Academie Royale de Belgique, Bulletin de
la Classe des Sciences, 65(6), 274–292.
Diks, C. (2009). Nonparametric tests for independence. In Encyclopedia of
complexity and systems science. New York: Springer, pp. 6252–6271.
Diks, C. and Panchenko, V. (2006). A new statistic and practical guidelines for
nonparametric Granger causality testing. Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control, 30(9), 1647–1669.
Drouet Mari, D. and Kotz, S. (2001). Correlation and dependence, vol. 518.
Singapore: World Scientific.
Embrechts, P., Lindskog, F. and McNeil, A. (2003). Modelling dependence with
copulas and applications to risk management. Handbook of Heavy Tailed
Distributions in Finance, 8(1), 329–384.
Engle, R.F. (1982). Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with estimates
of the variance of United Kingdom inflation. Econometrica, 50, 987–1007.
Engle, R.F. and Kroner, K.F. (1995). Multivariate simultaneous generalized
arch. Econometric Theory, 11(01), 122–150.
Fama, E.F. (1965). The behavior of stock-market prices. Journal of Business, 38,
34–105.
Ferguson, T.S., Genest, C. and Hallin, M. (2000). Kendall's tau for serial
dependence. Canadian Journal of Statistics, 28(3), 587–604.
Fermanian, J.D., Radulovic, D., Wegkamp, M., et al. (2004). Weak convergence
of empirical copula processes. Bernoulli, 10(5), 847–860.
Gallant, A.R., Rossi, P.E. and Tauchen, G. (1992). Stock prices and volume.
Review of Financial Studies, 5(2), 199–242.
Genest, C., Ghoudi, K. and Rémillard, B. (2007). Rank-based extensions of the
Brock, Dechert, and Scheinkman test. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 102, 1363–1376.
Genest, C., Quesada Molina, J. and Rodríguez Lallena, J. (1995). De
l'impossibilité de construire des lois à marges multidimensionnelles données à
partir de copules. Comptes rendus de l'Académie des sciences, Série 1,
Mathématique, 320(6), 723–726.
Geweke, J., Meese, R. and Dent, W. (1983). Comparing alternative tests of
causality in temporal systems: analytic results and experimental evidence.
Journal of Econometrics, 21(2), 161–194.
Granger, C.W. (1969). Investigating causal relations by econometric models and
cross-spectral methods. Econometrica, 37, 424–438.
Hamilton, J.D. (1994). Time series analysis, vol. 2. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Helsel, D.R. and Hirsch, R.M. (1992). Statistical methods in water resources,
vol. 49. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Hiemstra, C. and Jones, J.D. (1994). Testing for linear and nonlinear granger
causality in the stock price-volume relation. The Journal of Finance, 49(5),
1639–1664.
Hofert, M. (2010). Construction and sampling of nested Archimedean copulas.
In Copula theory and its applications (ed. Jaworski P, Durante F, Hrdle WK and
Rychlik T). Lecture Notes in Statistics. Berlin: Springer pp. 147–160.
Hofert, M., Kojadinovic, I., Maechler, M. and Yan, J. (2014). Copula:
multivariate dependence with copulas. R package version 0.999-8.
Hollander, M. and Wolfe, D.A. (1999). Nonparametric statistical methods. New
York: John Wiley & Sons.
Joe, H. (1997). Multivariate models and multivariate dependence concepts, vol.
73. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Jondeau, E., Poon, S.H. and Rockinger, M. (2007). Financial modeling under
non-Gaussian distributions. Berlin: Springer.
Kendall, M.G. (1938). A new measure of rank correlation. Biometrika, 30(1–2):
81–93.
Kim, G., Silvapulle, M.J. and Silvapulle, P. (2007). Comparison of
semiparametric and parametric methods for estimating copulas. Computational
Statistics & Data Analysis, 51(6), 2836–2850.
Lai, T.L. and Xing, H. (2008). Statistical models and methods for financial
markets. New York: Springer.
Ljung, G.M. and Box, G.E. (1978). On a measure of lack of fit in time series
models. Biometrika, 65(2), 297–303.
Lütkepohl, H. (2007). New introduction to multiple time series analysis. New
York: Springer.
Luukkonen, R., Saikkonen, P. and Teräsvirta, T. (1988). Testing linearity against
smooth transition autoregressive models. Biometrika, 75(3), 491–499.
Maronna, R.A., Martin, D.R. and Yohai, V.J. (2006). Robust statistics: theory
and methods. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
McLeod, A.I. and Jimenéz, C. (1984). Nonnegative definiteness of the sample
autocovariance function. The American Statistician, 38(4), 297–298.
McLeod, A.I. and Li, W.K. (1983). Diagnostic checking arma time series models
using squared-residual autocorrelations. Journal of Time Series Analysis, 4(4),
269–273.
McNeil, A.J. and Nešlehovà, J. (2009). Multivariate Archimedean copulas, d-
monotone functions and 1-norm symmetric distributions. The Annals of
Statistics, 37, 3059–3097.
Patterson, D.M. and Ashley, R.A. (2000). A nonlinear time series workshop: a
toolkit for detecting and identifying nonlinear serial dependence, vol. 2. New
York: Springer.
Poon, S.H., Rockinger, M. and Tawn, J. (2004). Extreme value dependence in
financial markets: diagnostics, models, and financial implications. Review of
Financial Studies, 17(2), 581–610.
Ruppert, D., and Matteson, D.S. (2015). Statistics and data analysis for financial
engineering.
Schepsmeier, U., Stoeber, J., Brechmann, E. and Gräler, B. (2012). Vinecopula:
statistical inference of vine copulas. R package version.
Schmid, F. and Schmidt, R. (2007). Multivariate conditional versions of
Spearman's rho and related measures of tail dependence. Journal of Multivariate
Analysis, 98(6), 1123–1140.
Shumway, R.H., and Stoffer, D.S. (2011). Time Series Analysis and Its
Applications: With R Examples. Springer Texts in Statistics.
Ŝiman, M. (2012). On Kendall's autocorrelations. Communications in Statistics:
Theory and Methods, 41(10), 1733–1738.
Sklar, M. (1959). Fonctions de Répartition à n Dimensions et Leurs Marges.
Publications de l'Institut de Statistique de L'Université de Paris, 8, 229–231.
Spearman, C. (1904). The proof and measurement of association between two
things. American Journal of Psychology, 15(1), 72–101.
Tsay, R. (2014). Multivariate time series analysis with R and financial
applications. Berlin: Springer.
Tsay, R.S. (1986). Nonlinearity tests for time series. Biometrika, 73(2), 461–466.
Tsay, R.S. (2010). Analysis of Financial Time Series. John Wiley & Sons.
Xu, W., Hou, Y., Hung, Y. and Zou, Y. (2013). A comparative analysis of
Spearman's rho and Kendall's tau in normal and contaminated normal models.
Signal Processing, 93(1), 261–276.
Zivot, E. and Wang, J. (2007). Modeling financial time series with S-PLUSR,
vol. 191. New York: Springer.
Chapter 9
Correlated Poisson Processes and Their
Applications in Financial Modeling
   Alexander Kreinin
   Risk Analytics, IBM, Canada

9.1 Introduction
Multivariate risk factor models set the foundation of financial risk measurement.
The modern financial theory often recommends jump-diffusion models to
describe dynamics of the individual risk factors, such as interest rates, foreign
exchange rates, stock indices, and volatility surfaces (Kou, 2002; Lipton and
Rennie, 2008; Merton, 1976; Musiela and Rutkowsky, 2008), One of the most
popular model of jumps, the Poisson model, requires introduction of a
codependence structure in the multivariate setting.
The multivariate Gaussian diffusion models are traditionally popular in financial
applications (Musiela and Rutkowsky, 2008). In this class of models, the
dynamics of the risk factors are described by the Gaussian stochastic processes.
The calibration problem in this case can be reduced to the estimation of the drift
vector and the diffusion matrix describing the covariance structure of the risk
factor space. The only constraint imposed on the covariance matrix is
nonnegativity of its eigenvalues.
It is very well known that calibration of the models for equity derivatives pricing
can be performed satisfactorily in the class of jump-diffusion processes (Kou,
2002; Kyprianou et al. 2005; Merton, 1974). Once the jump processes are
introduced, the calibration problem becomes more challenging and, technically,
more demanding. In particular, an admissible set of model parameters is
described by more sophisticated conditions: not only must an observed
covariance matrix have nonnegative eigenvalues but the elements of this matrix
should also obey additional inequalities depending on the intensities of the jump
processes. The nature of these new constraints and their computation is
discussed in Griffiths et al.(1979), Whitt (1976), and Duch et al. (2014).
The computation of the aditional constraints on the elements of the covariance
matrix appeared to be closely related to the analysis of the extreme joint
distributions having maximal and minimal correlations. Our approach to the
computation of the extreme joint distributions is, in spirit, very close to
thatdeveloped by Frechet (1951) and Whitt (1976). The only difference is that
we propose a pure probabilistic method for the computation of the joint
probabilities, based on the Strong Law of Large Numbers and a well-known
result on optimal permutations that can be derived from Hardy et al. (1952).
Practitioners often set the calibration problem as a matching of the intensities
and correlations of the components. One of the difficulties of this problem for
multivariate Poisson processes is presented by negative elements of the
correlation matrix. We propose a solution to this problem having the following
two ingredients:
   1. A construction of the joint distribution with extreme correlations at some
   future point in time, usually at the end of time horizon, .
   2. A backward simulation of Poisson processes in the interval        .
The resulting multivariate Poisson process is a Markov process but not infinitely
divisible.1
The chapter is organized as follows. In Section 9.2, we discuss some classes of
risk factor models with jump processes and their existing and potential
applications in different areas of financial risk management. In this section, we
discuss some technical obstacles in calibration associated with negative
correlations. In Section 9.3, the common shock model and the mixed Poisson
model are presented in the bivariate case. The multivariate case of the CSM is
discussed in Section 9.4. The first model, traditionally used in the actuarial
science, introduces correlations by the simultaneous jumps in the components of
the process. This model is too restrictive; it does not solve the problem with
negative correlations. The second model introduces a much more general class
of processes having time-dependent correlations between the components. This
model addresses the negative correlation problems but might have a slow
convergence to the stationary distribution, making the calibration problematic.
In Section 9.4, we describe the backward simulation algorithm and discuss the
calibration problem for the parameters of the model. We also compare the
backward simulation approach with the forward simulation. One of the
ingredients of the solution, the computation of the lower and upper bounds for
the correlation coefficient, is described in Section 9.5, where the computation of
the extreme joint distribution and its support is presented. The computation of
the extreme distribution allows one to find the boundaries for the correlation
coefficient of the corresponding components of the multivariate Poisson process.
We also describe a numerical scheme for the approximation of the joint
distribution and computation of the boundaries for the correlation coefficients.
These results, leading to the additional necessary conditions on the elements of
the correlation matrix, are obtained with the help of a version of the Frechet–
Hoeffding theorem2 presented in Section 9.5.4.
Implementation of the algorithm for the computation of the extreme distributions
requires continuity bounds of the approximation of the joint distribution by a
distribution with bounded support. These bounds are obtained in Section 9.5.5.
In Section 9.6, we demonstrate a few patterns of the support of a bivariate
Poisson distribution typical for maximal and minimal correlations. These
examples are computed using approximation of the joint extreme distribution
analyzed in Section 9.5.5. In Section 9.7, we extend the backward simulation
(BS) approach to the processes having both Poisson and Wiener components.
The idea behind this extension is to bring together, in a common framework,
both Poisson and Gaussian processes and to develop a unified simulation
algorithm for scenario generation with diffusion and pure jump components. In
the Poisson–Wiener case, the time structure of correlations under BS simulation
appeared to be linear, as in the case of the multivariate Poisson processes. This
feature of the BS simulation put distance between our approach and the
traditional forward simulation keeping the correlation constant over time.
The chapter concludes with comments on possible extensions of the BS an
method and on the interplay between the probabilistic approach and the infinite-
dimensional linear programming optimization problem describing the extreme
measures.

9.2 Poisson Processes and Financial Scenarios
In this section, we review some existing and potential applications of the
multivariate Poisson processes in financial modeling. The Poisson and the
Gaussian risk factor models can be integrated into a general scenario generation
framework for portfolio risk measurement. In this framework, the codependence
structure of the risk factors is usually described by their correlation matrix.
The correlation matrix of the risk factors contains three submatrices:
describing the Gaussian components,        describing the Poisson component, and
    describing the cross-correlations of the risk factors.
Such a complex model for the risk factor space can be used in the integrated
market–credit risk portfolio risk framework as well as for pricing of financial
derivatives. For operational risk modeling, the matrix     should be sufficient.

9.2.1 Integrated Market–Credit Risk Modeling
Monte Carlo methods form the industry standard approach to the computation of
risk measures of credit portfolios. The conceptual model of the risk factors
dynamics is a combination of the Merton model, developed in Merton (1974),
and the conditional independence framework (Vasicek 1987, 2002).
The first dynamic integrated market–credit risk modeling framework was
developed in Iscoe et al. (1999) for the Gaussian risk factors. Each credit-risky
name in the portfolio is characterized by a credit-worthiness index described as a
linear combination of the systemic components dependent on market risk
factors, macroeconomic indices, and an idiosyncratic component. Calibration of
the model is reduced to a series of the default boundary problems that must be
solved for each name in the portfolio independently of the other names. This
problem is equivalent to the generalized Shiryaev problem (Jaimungal et al.,
2013) studied in the Gaussian case. In Jaimungal et al. (2013), it was
demonstrated that adding a single random jump at time          to the Brownian
motion process allows one to cover a very rich class of default time distributions
including, in particular, finite mixture of gamma distributions.
Introduction of the general jump processes in the context of credit portfolio
modeling leads to a nontrivial calibration problem streaming from heterogeneity
of the risk factor space.
Pricing of credit derivatives is also based on the conditional-independence
framework (Avellaneda and Zhu, 2001; Hull and White, 2001; Iscoe and
Kreinin, 2006, 2007), where randomized, time-dependent default intensities of
jumps describe the default process. The number of components of this process is
equal to the number of names in the basket credit derivative.

9.2.2 Market Risk and Derivatives Pricing
Geometric Brownian motion has been widely used in the option-pricing
framework to model returns of the assets. In Merton (1976), Merton proposed a
jump-diffusion model to describe better a phenomenon called volatility smile in
the option markets. However, he could not address the leptokurtic feature that
the return distribution of assets may have a higher peak and two (asymmetric)
heavier tails than those of the normal distribution.
heavier tails than those of the normal distribution.
To incorporate both of them, Kou (2002) proposed a double exponential jump-
diffusion model. The model is simple enough to produce analytical solutions for
a variety of option-pricing problems, including call and put options, interest rate
derivatives, and path-dependent options. Detailed accounts of the development
in the area of option pricing using jump models can be found in Cont and
Tankov (2003, 2006), Boyarchenko and Levendorski (2002), and Carr and
Madan (1998). An alternative class of models with non-Gaussian innovations is
discussed in Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2001) and Kyprianou et al.
(2005).
Notice that risk-neutral pricing of basket derivatives with several underlying
instruments in the jump-diffusion framework will require a model with several
correlated jump processes.

9.2.3 Operational Risk Modeling
Dependent Poisson and compound Poisson processes find many applications in
the area of operational risk (OR) modeling (see Aue and Kalkbrener, 2006);
Badescu et al., 2013, 2015; Böcker and Klüppelberg, 2010; Chavez-Demoulin et
al., 2006; Embrechts and Puccetti, 2006; Panjer, 2006; Peters et al., 2009;
Shevchenko, 2011; and references therein). In the OR models, Poisson processes
describe random operational events in the business units of a financial
organization (Chavez-Demoulin et al., 2006; Lindskog and McNeil, 2001;
Nešlehovà et al., 2006; Peters et al., 2009; Shevchenko, 2011). The result of
each operational event is a random loss. Thus, the loss process is represented as
a multivariate compound Poisson process.
While modeling credit events and credit derivatives pricing in the integrated
market–credit risk framework are, probably, the most complicated tasks in
financial risk measurement, the isolated operational risk-modeling problem is
relatively simple. The operational risk framework is based on the assumption
that operational losses of the th business unit, (           ), are described by a
compound process

                                                                                9.1


where     is the number of operational events occurred by time, ; is the
number of business units in the financial organization; and  is the loss of the
 th unit in the th event. The problem is how to find distribution of the
aggregated losses




and compute the risk measures of the loss process for the purpose of capital
allocation.
Denote the arrival moments of the operational events in the th unit by
               . Then the number of operational events is




where      is the indicator function.
There are two standard models for the processes     . The first is the classical
Poisson model. The second is the negative binomial (NB) model generalizing the
classical Poisson model (see Barndorff-Nielsen and Yeo, 1969). In this chapter,
we do not discuss the technical details of the NB model, leaving this topic for
future publications.

9.2.4 Correlation of Operational Events
Statistical analysis of the operational events indicates the presence of both
positive and negative correlations in the multivariate arrival process (Bae, 2012).
In Duch et al., (2014), we considered a fragment of the estimated annual
correlation matrix of the operational events, originally studied in Bae, (2012).
The estimated correlation matrix             , where                   is the
correlation coefficient of the coordinates of the multivariate process, , looks as
follows:
One can notice that there are some correlation coefficients that cannot be ignored
for the simulation purposes. In particular,           and            represent the
extreme correlations in     . Practitioners working in the operational risk area
often ignore the correlation structure of the process, , for the sake of
simulation simplicity. We believe that such a simplification may result in
inaccurate estimation of the operational losses.

9.3 Common Shock Model and Randomization of
Intensities
Two possible extensions of the multivariate model with independent components
are considered in this section. The first extension is the common shock model
(CSM), which has traditional applications in insurance as well as in the area of
operational risk modeling.
The second extension is randomization of intensities of the Poisson processes,
leading to a more general class of stochastic processes usually called the mixed
Poisson processes.

9.3.1 Common Shock Model
Correlation of Poisson processes can be controlled by various operations applied
to independent processes. One of the most popular operations, often considered
in actuarial applications, is a superposition of random processes, the CSM
(Lindskog and McNeil, 2001; Powojovsky et al., 2002; Shevchenko, 2011). The
idea of this model is described here in the bivariate case. Consider three
independent Poisson processes,        , , and      , and denote their intensities by
  , , and , respectively. Let us form two new processes using a standard
superposition operation of the processes,                  and                  ,
defined as follows. If                 and                  , then the
superposition of the processes,           , is defined by




Clearly, the processes     and     are dependent; their correlation coefficient,




does not depend on time (see Lindskog and McNeil, 2001; Powojovsky et al.,
2002) and is always nonnegative.
If all the elements of the correlation matrix, , are positive, the CSM can be
used for approximation of the multivariate Poisson processes (Powojovsky et al.,
2002). However, if there are negative elements, the CSM has difficulties
explaining these correlations and cannot be used unless the estimated negative
elements are small.

9.3.2 Randomization of Intensities
One promising approach to the analysis and simulation of the jump processes
with negative correlations is randomization of intensities. In this case, the
resulting processes, usually called mixed Poisson processes, will have a more
general probabilistic structure and nonstationary correlations.


  Proposition 9.1 (Rolski et al., 1999)
  The correlation coefficient of the mixed Poisson processes is

                                                                             9.2




Randomization, clearly, increases applicability of the Poisson model. The only
drawback of the model is that convergence to the limit value of the correlation
coefficient may be very slow.

9.4 Simulation of Poisson Processes
Let us now discuss two approaches to simulation of the Poisson processes. The
first method is the forward simulation of the arrival moments. It is, probably, the
most natural simulation method for independent Poisson processes. The second
method, discussed in this section, is the BS method described in the univariate
case in Fox (1996) and in the multivariate case in Duch et al., (2014).

9.4.1 Forward Simulation
Let                     , be a -dimensional Poisson process with
independent components. Denote by the parameter of the th coordinate of
the process, (         ). Then,



It is very well known that the interarrival times of the th Poisson process,
                    , are mutually independent, for all and , and identically
distributed, for each random variables with exponential distribution,



Probably, the most natural method to generate arrival moments of the Poisson
processes is the recursive simulation

                                                                                  9.3
The number of events,    , in the interval,      , is a stochastic process with
independent increments such that

                                                                                  9.4


If one is only interested in the number of events in the interval,   , the random
vector, , can be sampled directly from the joint distribution (9.4).
It is very well known that if the vectors of the interarrival times are independent,
the process       is Markovian in the natural filtration,               , generated by
the process   .
Denote by                                       the probabilities of the states of the
Markov process,        . Then,

                                                                                    9.5


where             .

Until now, we considered the processes with independent coordinates. In the
general case, the following alternative, describing the correlation structure of the
(multivariate) Poisson process, can be found in Shreve (2004) and Revus and
Yor (1991). The key role in this proposition plays the natural filtration, ,
described in Revus and Yor (1991). Recall that in the definition of the
multivariate Poisson process given in Revus and Yor (1991) the increments of
the components of the process are conditionally independent conditional on the
natural filtration, .


  Proposition 9.2
  Let       and  be two Poisson processes measurable with respect to the
  filtration . Then, either these processes are independent or they have
  simultaneous jumps.


  Remark 9.1
  If the processes    and      do not have simultaneous jumps, then the
  system of equations (9.5) has a product-form solution



  where
     The latter is equivalent to independence of       and    . The probabilities
           satisfy (9.5) with       . If the processes    and     have
     simultaneous jumps with positive intensity, then the bivariate process has
     correlated coordinates.3


     Remark 9.2
     The statement of Proposition 9.2 can be generalized to arbitrary local
     martingales and semi-martingales; see Revus and Yor (1991). Simulation of
     correlated processes using joint distribution of the interarrival times is not
     very convenient: one has to find relations between the correlations of the
     interarrival times and correlations of the number of events,       . One
     commonly used approach by practitioners is to exploit the CSM
     (Powojovsky et al., 2002). Let us take      independent Poisson processes,
                     , and form the processes      obtained by superposition of the
     subset of the processes      .

More precisely, let        be a sequence of the arrival times of the th process,      :




Denote




Then the th process,



is
The intensity,   , of the process      satisfies

                                                                                 9.6


where     is intensity of   .
The elements of the correlation matrix are

                                                                                 9.7


where




The calibration problem for the CSM can be formulated as follows. Find , the
matrix of contributions,          ,                 , and a vector of intensities
            such that Equations (9.6) and (9.7) are satisfied, where , , are
estimated intensities of the multivariate process and     are estimated correlation
coefficients.


  Proposition 9.3
  The correlation coefficients,     , satisfy the inequality

                                                                                9.8




  Proof
  It immediately follows from (9.7) that the correlation coefficients must be
  nonnegative and must satisfy the inequality                , implying the
  upper bound for the elements of the correlation matrix.

Proposition 9.3 demonstrates that the CSM is too restrictive and may lead to
large errors if parameters of the model do not satisfy (9.8).

9.4.2 Backward Simulation
It is well known that the conditional distribution of the arrival moments of a
Poisson process in an interval,      , conditional on the number of events in this
        4
interval is uniform (Cont and Tankov, 2003). More precisely, let           ,
            be a sequence of independent random variables with a uniform
distribution in the interval,     .
Denote by     the th-order statistic of ,                :




  Theorem 9.1 (Cont and Tankov, 2003; Rolski
  et al., 1999; Nawrotzki, 1962)
  The conditional distribution of the arrival moments,                   , of a
  Poisson process, , with finite intensity coincides with the distribution of
  the order statistics:

                                                                              9.9

The converse statement, formulated and proved here, is a foundation of the BS
method for Poisson processes. Consider a process, ,             defined as




where      is a random variable with a Poisson distribution; and the random
variables, , are mutually independent and independent of , identically
distributed, with the uniform distribution




  Theorem 9.2
Theorem 9.2
Let    have a Poisson distribution with parameter        . Then,   is a Poisson
process with intensity in the interval      .


Proof
We give here a combinatorial proof of the statement exploiting the analytical
properties of the binomial distribution and binomial thinning. First of all, we
notice that         . Let us prove that
      1. For any interval,       , of the length ,            ,
                               ,             .
      2. For any disjoint subintervals               ,                   , the
      random variables          are mutually independent,                .
Denote                       . By definition of   , we have        and

                                                                             9.10

Notice that       is the number of events that have occurred in the interval
       . The conditional distribution of the random variable       is
binomial



and the probability generating function              is5                    .
 The proof of the first statement of Theorem 9.2 is based on the following.


Lemma 9.1
Let          be a probability distribution. Denote its generating function by
      :




Consider a sequence
  Consider a sequence

                                                                            9.11

  The sequence          is a probability distribution with the generating
  function,   ,

                                                                            9.12
Applying Lemma 9.6, with                                 and satisfying
equation (9.10) and      , we obtain that the generating function,
                           . Therefore, the increments of the process have a
Poisson distribution,            , and this distribution does not depend on .
To prove the second statement of the theorem, we need the following
generalization of Lemma 9.6. Consider a vector                 , satisfying the
conditions




and denote




Denote                              . For an   -dimensional vector,
                  , with nonnegative integer coordinates,         , we define the
norm of the vector




For any -dimensional vector,                    , with nonnegative coordinates,
      , and     , we denote
We also introduce a combinatorial coefficient

                                                                                 9.13


It is not difficult to see that this coefficient can be written in a more symmetric
form as a multinomial coefficient




  Lemma 9.2
  Let       be the probability distribution of a discrete random variable,
  and let           be its generating function. Let         and the
  combinatorial coefficient,      , be defined by (9.13). Let            be
  defined by

                                                                               9.14


  and denote by        the generating function




  Then

                                                                               9.15


Lemma 9.7 is proved in the Appendix. Let us now finish the proof of the second
statement.
Denote         ,              ,               , and               . Then we have
Therefore,

                                                                                  9.16


Consider the generating function




Applying Lemma 9.7 with                           ,        and       , we derive




The latter relation implies independence of the random variables
                  . Therefore, the process           has independent
increments. Theorem 9.2 is thus proved.


  Remark 9.3
  The conditional uniformity of the (unsorted) arrival moments is a
  characteristic property of the more general class of mixed Poisson processes
  (Nawrotzki, 1962; Rolski et al., 1999).

Now we are in a position to formulate the BS method in the of case of         .
   Step 1. Generate a random number, , having the Poisson distribution with
   parameter :             , and assign      .
   Step 2. Generate uniformly distributed random variables in the interval
       ,           ,          .
   Step 3. Sort the random variables,    , in the ascending order.
   Step 4. Repeat Steps 1–3        times, where       is the required number of
   scenarios.
  Remark 9.4
  The BS method is applicable to the class of mixed Poisson processes with
  random intensity. It can also be used for simulation of jump processes
  represented as a time-transformed Poisson process (Feigin, 1979).


  Remark 9.5
  The BS of the Poisson processes can be implemented using quasi–Monte
  Carlo (QMC) algorithms (see Fox, 1996; Fox and Glynn, 1988). In Fox
  (1996), in Step 1, the stratified sampling was proposed for generation of the
  number of arrivals, , and QMC for generation of arrival times. This
  numerical strategy significantly increases the rate of convergence.


9.4.2.1 Backward Simulation:
It is easy to extend the BS algorithm to the multivariate Poisson processes.
Suppose that marginal distributions of the random vector
are Poisson,                . Denote the correlation coefficient of   and        by
    .


  Theorem 9.3
  Consider the processes




  where the random variables,                      , are mutually independent
  and uniformly distributed in the interval     . Then,      is a multivariate
  Poisson process in the interval       and

                                                                               9.17


  Proof
 Proof
 We have already proved in Theorem 9.2 that         is a Poisson process. Let us
 now formulate the auxiliary result used in the derivation of (9.17).
 Consider a bivariate, integer-valued random vector,               ,       , and
 denote


 its probability distribution. By      , we denote the generating function




 Consider a random vector,             , such that for all               , and


                                                                              9.18

 where                  . The components of the random vector           are
 conditionally independent. The joint probability,                        , can be
 written as

                                                                              9.19



 Lemma 9.3
 Suppose that the variance and the first moment of the random variables,         ,
       , are equal:6              . The generating function
                          , satisfies the relation

                                                                              9.20
 The correlation coefficient of the random variables         and   is

                                                                              9.21

Lemma 9.9 is proved in the Appendix.
Lemma 9.9 is proved in the Appendix.
Let us apply Lemma 9.9 with                    and               . The conditional
probabilities,                                        , satisfy (9.18) with
             and                           . Then, Lemma 9.9 implies (9.17).
Theorem 9.4 states the Markovian structure of the process . If         , is a
Poisson process and, obviously, is Markovian in the natural filtration. If    ,
the Markovian nature of the process is not obvious since it is constructed
backward.


  Theorem 9.4
  The process                          is a Markov process in the interval            .



  Proof
  Let                                       be a partition of the interval    .
  Consider integer vectors,        ,                               ,              ,
  and denote




  By construction, the coordinates of are conditionally independent, and the
  arrival moments have conditional uniform distributions. Therefore,

                                                                                  9.22




  where                 ,              ,                 and         .
  Consider the conditional probabilities
  We have

                                                                            9.23




  Equation (9.23) implies

                                                                            9.24
  Notice that                              . Equations, (9.23) and (9.24)
  imply


  as was to be proved.


9.4.2.2 Generation of Poisson Random Vectors
Using the BS method, we reduce simulation of the multivariate Poisson
processes to generation of the random integer-valued vector with marginal
Poisson distribution. The following approach to generation of the Poisson
random vectors, based on the idea of transformation of Gaussian random vectors
with properly assigned correlations, is considered in Yahav and Shmueli (2011)
and Duch et al. (2014).
Let us recall one simple, general property of random variables: if is a
continuous random variable with the cumulative distribution function (cdf),        ,
then the random variable,          , has the standard uniform distribution,
, in the unit interval.
Conversely, given a distribution function, , and a sample from the uniform
distribution, , , , , we obtain a new sample,                   ,
              , from the distribution (see Johnson and Kotz, 1969; Johnson et
al., 1997).
Consider a random vector,              , with a mean-zero multivariate normal
distribution,       , with the correlation matrix, , and unit variances. The
random vector,                       , where      is the standard normal cdf, has a
multivariate distribution with the standard uniform marginals. Let     be the
integer part of , (      ). Denote




the cdf of the Poisson random variable. Applying the inverse Poisson cdf to each
coordinate of , we obtain a random vector                , where
has Poisson marginal distribution with parameter . The correlation coefficient,
                , is




and

                                                                                 9.25

9.4.2.3 Model Calibration
Let us now briefly discuss the calibration problem. In Duch et al. (2014), the
calibration problem was set as a matching of the intensities, , and the
correlation coefficients, . The intensities, , can be found from
theobservations of the number of events in the interval,     . In Duch et al.
(2014), it is shown that

                                                                                 9.26




where             ,                        .
The probabilities,                                       , can be written as a
linear combination of the bivariate normal distribution functions,         , with
the arguments depending on the indices and . Then, from (9.25) and (9.26),
we obtain an implicit equation for the correlation coefficient,     .
A numerical scheme for the computation of the matrix               is considered in
detail in Duch et al. (2014). There is, however, one delicate problem related to
the existence of the correlation matrix . The problem is the sufficient
conditions, for a given positive semidefinite matrix to be a correlation matrix of
a random vector with the Poisson marginal distributions, depend on the
parameters, , of these distributions. The latter property is in contrast with
Gaussian random vectors. Thus, the admissibility test is required to verify if the
calibration problem has a solution. It is shown in Duch et al. (2014) that the
calibration problem for multivariate processes is decomposed into a series of
bivariate problems for each correlation coefficient. This problem is analyzed in
Section 9.5.

9.5 Extreme Joint Distribution
We would like to find the range,           , of the admissible values of the
correlation coefficient, given the intensities, and , of the random variables,
   and      , with Poisson marginal distributions. A straightforward observation is
that this range is asymmetrical. Indeed, it is not difficult to see that the maximal
correlation can be 1 in the case of equal intensities. On the other hand, it is
impossible to obtain         , simply because both and           are nonnegative,
unbounded random variables and a linear relation,                     with a constant
      and an arbitrary finite , contradicts the nonnegativity of the random
variables.

9.5.1 Reduction to Optimization Problem
Denote the marginal probabilities of the vector          by                 and
                ,               . The results of this subsection are derived in a
general case and do not use the Poisson specification of the marginal
probabilities.
Let us find the joint distributions of the random vector,         , such that the
correlation coefficient              takes an extreme value,          , and

                                                                                    9.27
where                    .

This problem was considered in Embrechts and Puccetti (2006), Griffiths et al.
(1979), and Nelsen (1987). The coefficients                      and
                   were numerically calculated in Griffiths et al. (1979) using
reduction to the optimization problem discussed below. In that chapter, it was
shown that both and           are nonmonotone functions of the intensities, and
  . It was proved in Griffiths et al. (1979), using the nonmonotonicity property,
that the distribution of the vector         is not infinitely divisible.
Denote by    the matrix of the joint probabilities



Let




Then the solution to the problem

                                                                                9.28




is the joint distribution maximizing (or minimizing) the correlation coefficient
given marginal distributions of and . Note that the problem (9.28) belongs
to the class of infinitely dimensional linear programming problems.7

9.5.2 Monotone Distributions
In this section, we describe the structure of the extreme joint distributions and
derive formulae for the joint probabilities,     and    (see Theorem 9.5). We
introduce two special classes of discrete, bivariate distributions that, according to
Frechet (1951), we call co-monotone and anti-monotone distributions, and prove
that, given marginal distributions, the solution to the extreme problem (9.28)
belongs to these classes. We also demonstrate that in the case of discrete
bivariate distributions, Theorem 9.5 is equivalent to the famous Frechet–
Hoeffding theorem on extreme distributions, obtained in Hoeffding (1940).
Consider a set of points, (finite or infinite),         , where                     .
Consider the subsets                              and                           .


  Definition 9.11
  A set                   is called co-monotone if      the vector            .A
  set         is called anti-monotone if                 .

Figure 9.1 illustrates the notion of the co-monotone and anti-monotone sets
introduced in Definition 9.11. Let          and be a permutation of elements.
The group of permutations of elements is denoted by          . Finally, we
introduce the notation                         .




Figure 9.1 Typical monotone paths.
Suppose that               is a finite, co-monotone set in ,         . Consider
the vectors,               and                  . Then there exists a
permutation, , such that both vectors      and    have monotonically increasing
coordinates:


If is an anti-monotone set, then there exists a permutation, , such that has
monotonically increasing coordinates and coordinates of     are monotonically
decreasing.
Let us now introduce the co-monotonicity of two-dimensional random vectors.
Consider a random vector,     , where and are discrete random variables.
Denote by             ,         , the support of its distribution. The
probabilities,                     , satisfy




  Definition 9.12
  We call the distribution, , co-monotone if its support is a co-monotone set.
  A discrete, bivariate distribution is called anti-monotone if its support is an
  anti-monotone set.

Let a random vector        take values on the lattice                          .
Denote                      , and introduce marginal cdf's                , and
            ,                  .
Suppose that               and               , are discrete distributions on   , and
denote by          the class of discrete bivariate distributions,



with the marginal distributions, and , having finite first and second
moments. If              is a distribution of a random vector   , then
          . Obviously the Poisson distributions, and , belong to                   .
The main result of this section is the following.


  Theorem 9.5
  The distribution,    , maximizing the correlation coefficient of and ,
  given marginal distributions, is co-monotone. If a vector      belongs to the
  support of    , then the probability,                   , satisfies

                                                                            9.29

                                                                            9.30
  where the probabilities               .
  The distribution, , minimizing the correlation coefficient of and        is
  anti-monotone. If a vector   belongs to the support of then

                                                                            9.31
  where             for               and            .
  The extreme distributions,    and         , are unique.

The rest of this subsection is dedicated to the proof of Theorem 9.5. At first, we
recall one important result on the monotone sequences of real numbers, that can
be found in Hardy et al. (1952). This result motivates introduction of the co-
monotone or anti-monotone distributions. After that, we prove that the extreme
distributions must be co-monotone and find their support and compute the joint
probabilities. The reasoning described below is quite general and does not
depend on the specific type of the marginal distributions.
Let                 be a monotone sequence of real numbers,              ,
             , and , , ,         be an arbitrary sequence of real numbers,
      . Denote the inner product of two vectors,       , and        , by




  Lemma 9.4 (Hardy et al., 1952)
  For any monotonically increasing sequence,               , and a vector,
        , there exist permutations,  and , solving the extreme problems
     and



     The permutation, , sorts the vector in ascending order; the permutation,
       , sorts the vector in descending order.

If     and   are co-monotone, then

                                                                               9.32
Indeed,




By the co-monotonicity assumption, there exists a permutation, , such that both
   and    are monotonically increasing. Then, Lemma 9.14 implies (3.32).
From now on, we will consider only discrete random vectors,          , defined on
   , the positive quadrant of the two-dimensional lattice. The joint probabilities
will be denoted by                     ,            in what follows.
Consider two monotone sequences,             and        , both containing the set of
all nonnegative, integer numbers satisfying the inequalities               ,
              . Obviously, these sequences are co-monotone. Take the set
,               , for some fixed . Let us connect the nodes           and
          by the arrows,                  . Then we obtain a directed path in
(see Figure 9.1a). This path can be viewed as a graph of a monotonically
increasing, multivalued function taking integer values.
In the case of the anti-monotone sequences, the path looks similar to that
displayed in Figure 9.1b; it can be viewed as a graph of a monotonically
decreasing, multivalued function taking integer values. To emphasize that the
introduced path contains support of the distribution, we shall call it the support
path, or, for the sake of brevity, the -path.


     Lemma 9.5
Suppose that a distribution     solves the problem (9.28),        . Then
is co-monotone.


Proof
Let      belong to the support of . We shall prove that             .
Indeed, the probabilities, , satisfy the constraints

                                                                        9.33

                                                                        9.34
where                  and                 . On the other hand,

                                                                        9.35

                                                                        9.36
where                 and                 . Obviously,

                                                                        9.37
The function         can be written as



where the set of indices, , contains only four indices
                                ; and is the complementary set,            .

Denote           ,        . Equations (9.33–9.37) imply
  We have                                      . The objective function can be
  written as



  The solution to the problem,              , is attained at the boundary,           .
  In our case,                    . If            , then          . If           ,
  then from (9.37) we obtain           . If              , then              .

A similar statement can be proved for the minimization problem.


  Lemma 9.6
  Let   be a solution to problem (9.28),            . Then    is anti-monotone.

Monotonicity of the distributions is directly related to monotonicity of the
samples of random variables from these distributions.


  Lemma 9.7
  Consider a finite random sample,           , of independent, two-
  dimensional vectors             from a co-monotone distribution. Then,
  is co-monotone.
  If a random sample of independent two-dimensional vectors, , has co-
  monotone coordinates for any integer  , then is a sample from a co-
  monotone distribution.


  Proof
  Consider an independent, finite sample, , from a co-monotone distribution.
  Let us find a permutation, , ordering the first coordinate,   , and apply
  this permutation to the second coordinate. Then we obtain
  If the second coordinate,         , is also ordered, the proof is finished.
  Suppose, on the contrary, there is a couple of indices,       , such that      ;
  then the first coordinate must satisfy the relation        , otherwise the co-
  monotonicity condition of the support is not satisfied. Then the transposition
  of the elements, and , puts these elements in ascending order. After a
  finite number of transpositions, we find a permutation, , ordering the
  second coordinate and keeping the first coordinate without changes. Then
  the permutation,      , makes monotone coordinate-wise.
  To prove the converse statement, let us assume that support of the bivariate
  distribution is not co-monotone. Then there exist two elements of the
  support,             and         , such that                     . Since both
  elements of the support have positive probabilities, there exists sufficiently
  large such that the sample of independent vectors contains both vectors,
     and . Then is not co-monotone.

Lemma 9.18 is a direct analog of Lemma 9.17 for the anti-monotone
distributions.


  Lemma 9.8
  Consider a finite random sample,                , of independent, two-
  dimensional vectors               from an anti-monotone distribution. Then,
  the set        is anti-monotone. If a random sample of independent two-
  dimensional vectors, , has anti-monotone coordinates for any integer
  , then is a sample from an anti-monotone distribution.

Let us now find the joint probabilities and compute the support of the extreme
distributions. We will use a probabilistic argument based on the Strong Law of
Large Numbers (SLLN) (Johnson et al., 1997). Let us start with the distribution
   , maximizing the correlation coefficient. Consider a sample,             , of
the size, , from the distribution . There exists a permutation, , such that
the vectors        and          both have monotone coordinates. As           , we
obtain two sequences of increasing length,
                                                                                    9.38




with the number of elements,          and          , in the sequences satisfying, by the
SLLN, the relations:

                                                                                    9.39




The probabilities,              and                   , satisfy




Let us denote the number of pairs,      , by       . In particular, the number of pairs,
     , is

                                                                                    9.40

  Lemma 9.9
  The limits,



  exist almost surely for all               , as         . They satisfy equation
  (9.29).


  Proof
  In the case of the state   , existence of the limit,    , follows from the
  continuity of the function    , equation (9.40), and existence of the limits in
  (9.39). Let us prove the statement of the lemma for         and        . Consider
  the sequence of vectors,        ,            . It is not difficult to see that
  satisfies the relation

                                                                               9.41
  where




  and, as usual,               . Indeed, the index, , of the pair,    , in the
  sequence satisfies the inequalities                             and
                      . Equation (9.41) follows from these inequalities.
  Passing to the limit as        , we obtain that almost surely



  Existence of the limits,    , now follows from (9.41) and continuity of the
  functions         and          . From (9.41), we find that the probability, ,
  of the state    satisfies:8



  Equation (9.29) is thus proved.

In the case of minimal correlation, for any sample,            , there exists a
permutation, , sorting the first coordinate in ascending order and the second
coordinate in descending order:



and the second coordinate forms a decreasing sequence:



As         , we obtain two sequences,
                                                                                   9.42




with the number of elements,           and      , satisfying, by the SLLN, equation
(9.39) almost surely.


  Lemma 9.10
  The limits              exist almost surely for all              , as        ,
  and satisfy equation (9.31).


  Proof
  The proof is a minor modification of that of Lemma 9.19. Let for some ,
        and       . Notice that              (see (9.42)). Then we have

                                                                              9.43
  Passing to the limit in (9.43), as         , we derive (9.31).

Proof of Lemma 9.20 completes the derivation of Equations (9.29)–(9.31).
Uniqueness of the extreme distributions, and     , follows immediately from
(9.29)–(9.31). Theorem 9.5 is thus proved.

9.5.3 Computation of the Joint Distribution
Equation (9.29), in principle, allows one to find all the elements of the support of
the maximal distribution and to compute the probabilities. In practice, this
computation can be done much more efficiently by the algorithm described in
this section. The idea of the extreme joint distribution (EJD) algorithm is to walk
along the -path, instead of considering all possible pairs,      , satisfying
Equation (9.29).
It is useful to look again at the structure of the sample, represented by (9.38).
When is fixed, we have segments of a random length containing
elements equal to . As           the length of the segment, the random variables,
      and     , also tend to infinity, but the ratios (9.39) converge to finite
limits.
In the limit, the scaled diagram (9.38) will look like two partitions of the unit
interval,       with the nodes,                 and                   , defined by
the cdf's.
The partition,                     , is formed by the union of the nodes of the
partitions                     and   ; see Figure 9.2. We denote the nodes of the
partition, , by        .




Figure 9.2 Partitions of the unit interval:                .
It is convenient to assume that each node of          “remembers” the original
partition it came from ( or         ), its index in the original partition, and its
cumulative probability. The initial element of the support,                 , is    ;
the probability of this state is                 . The algorithm scans the elements
of the partition,    ; finds the support of the extreme, bivariate distribution; and
computes the joint probabilities, .

9.5.3.1 EJD Algorithm
We shall start with the case of maximal correlation.
    Step 0.        ;                    ;        .
    Step 1.                .
    Step 2. If            for some and                 for all , then         and
            . If           for some and                 for all , then        and
             . If there exist such and that                      , then        and
             .
   Step 3. Assign the th element of the support,           .
   Step 4.                  .
   Step 5. Go to Step 1.
In the case of minimal correlation, we “flip” the distribution function and use the
tail probabilities,                           , instead of    (see Figure 9.3).




Figure 9.3 Partitions of the unit interval: .


  Remark 9.6
  One can think of the EJD algorithm as an observer moving along the -
  path in ; as such, the time to get to the th node is . Each time the
  observer's position is the      th node,      , of the support, she records the
  coordinates of the node into the list and marks the node with the probability
                 .


9.5.4 On the Frechet–Hoeffding Theorem
In the discrete case, the Frechet–Hoeffding theorem can be formulated as
follows. Consider a space          of discrete bivariate distributions, with the
marginal distributions, and .


  Theorem 9.6 (Frechet, 1951; Hoeffding, 1940)
The bivariate cdf,                        , maximizing the correlation of
and is

                                                                            9.44
The bivariate cdf,       , minimizing the correlation of     and    is

                                                                            9.45


Proposition 9.4
Theorem 9.5 is equivalent to the Frechet–Hoeffding theorem.


Proof
We shall only prove that Theorem 9.5 implies the Frechet–Hoeffding
theorem in the case of maximimal correlation. It is enough to prove (9.44) in
the case that the node,    , belongs to the -path. We give the proof by
induction on the index of the node.
Let us check the basis of induction. The first node is     . If         , then
                                            . Thus, equation (9.44) is satisfied.
Suppose that the statement is true for the th node,    :
                        . Let us prove the statement for the         st node.
There are three possibilities: the      st node is          , the      st node is
           , or the      st node is        . In the first case, using Equation
(9.29), we find




Since the -path contains the arrow from the node        to        , we have
       . On the other hand, since the second coordinate of the node is ,
         . Thus,                 . Then we obtain that



Therefore,
  Therefore,


  as was to be proved in the first case.
  In the second case, the        st node is          . The diagonal segment in
  the -path appears only if           . Then we have




  The last case is analogous to the first one.


9.5.5 Approximation of the Extreme Distributions
For practical computations, the marginal distributions,         and              ,
with two finite moments can be approximated by the distributions with finite
support,          and             , such that




where            ,           ,             , and       . Let            be an
extreme bivariate distribution and           be the corresponding extreme
bivariate distribution with the marginals, and . Then it follows from
Theorem 9.5 that satisfies the inequality




Similar inequality can be obtained for the approximation of the correlation
coefficient. We shall formulate one sufficient condition that guarantees the
approximation.


  Proposition 9.5
Suppose that the first and the second moments of the marginal distributions
are finite. Then, given       , one can find the integer numbers, and ,
such that there exists a discrete bivariate distribution
approximating the extreme distribution, , in the following sense:

                                                                         9.46

                                                                         9.47




Proof
We consider the case of the distribution,        , maximizing the correlation
coefficient. Notice that the first two finite moments of a discrete random
variable taking nonnegative, integer values satisfy the relations

                                                                         9.48


                                                                         9.49

Since           , Equations (9.48) and (9.49) imply convergence of the series
           . Then we can find     and    such that

                                                                         9.50


                                                                         9.51

Consider the distribution functions,    and   :

                                                                         9.52

                                                                         9.53
Let be the extreme bivariate distribution, maximizing the correlation,
corresponding to the marginals, and . It is not difficult to see that
for      or      .
The first moments of the marginal distributions satisfy the inequalities




Indeed,




The second inequality is derived analogously. Consider the expected values



We have




The first sum,                     , satisfies the inequality




The second sum,                       , satisfies the inequality




and the third sum,                     , also satisfies         . Putting all the
pieces together, we obtain               .
  Remark 9.7
  Similar reasoning allows us to prove continuity of the function
                     on the space        .



9.6 Numerical Results
9.6.1 Examples of the Support
We shall start with the support of the joint distribution maximizing the
correlation coefficient when        . In this case, the support is a set of integer
points,          , on the main diagonal; the correlation coefficient is               .
Figure 9.4 displays the support of the extreme distribution,      , with the
intensities      and       . We apply the EJD algorithm with -approximation9
of the marginal distributions, where         . It allows us to find (numerically)
the joint probabilities, , and the correlation coefficient,

                                                                                  9.54


The error of the approximation of the correlation coefficient               . The
maximal correlation                     in this case. One can notice that the support
of the joint distribution is located close to the main diagonal, but for large values
of the first coordinate, some deviation from the diagonal pattern is observed. The
reason for that is inequality of the intensities of the Poisson processes,        ,
leading to a re-balance of the probability mass of the bivariate distribution
maximizing the correlation coefficient.
Figure 9.4 Support of the distribution    :           .
In the case    , the deviation of the support from the main diagonal increases as
            (see Figure 9.5). Applying the EJD algorithm, we find the joint
probabilities,            , and from (9.54) the correlation coefficient,     .
Figure 9.5 Support of the distribution   :   .
Figure 9.6 Support of the distribution      :      .
Let us now consider an example of the support for the minimal (negative)
correlation of the random variables. We take       and            . The joint
probabilities, , can be found by the EJD algorithm. In this case, the minimal
value of the correlation coefficient is           . The geometric pattern of the
support is different in this case because the minimal value of the correlation
coefficient is negative.

9.6.2 Correlation Boundaries
The correlation coefficients,          and         , are not monotone functions of
                            10
   as intensity is fixed. The extreme correlation coefficients are shown in
Figure 9.7 for        . We also mention here that the lower and upper boundaries
are not symmetrical. It is proved in Griffiths et al., (1979) that the two-
dimensional process with variable correlation between the components cannot be
infinitely divisible. The latter fact may look surprising because the marginals are
the Poisson distributions belonging to the class of infinitely divisible
distributions.
Figure 9.7 Correlation boundaries:       .
Let us now compare the correlation boundaries obtained using the traditional,
forward simulation method and the BS method. We shall call the boundaries
computed by the forward simulation (FS) the FS boundaries. The boundaries
computed by the backward simulation method will be called the BS boundaries.
In Figure 9.8, the correlation boundaries are displayed for the intensities
and       . The time horizon       . Recall that under the FS approach, we have to
generate two sequences,        and     , such that



and the random variables       and      have minimal possible correlation for
each ; at the same time, each of the sequences           and          is formed
by independent identically distributed random variables.
Figure 9.8 Comparison of correlation boundaries:      .
According to the Frechet–Hoeffding theorem, the interarrival times,      and
                                         , should satisfy the relation


to provide minimal possible correlation between the interarrival times. The
correlation coefficient,          , is computed using a Monte Carlo simulation
with 900,000 Monte Carlo samples.
The computation of the FS upper boundary in Figure 9.8 is also based on the
Frechet–Hoeffding theorem. According to the latter, the interarrival times,
and     , should satisfy the relation



to provide maximal possible correlation between the arrival moments. One can
see that the maximal correlation of the processes, and , under the FS is a
constant, while under the BS it is a linear function of time. In the case , the
BS allows one to reach stronger correlations of the processes than the FS of the
arrival moments.

9.7 Backward Simulation of the Poisson–Wiener
Process
The BS approach is applicable to the class of multivariate stochastic process
with the components formed by either Poisson or Gaussian processes. In this
section, we analyze the basic bivariate process,            , where is a
Poisson process with intensity ; and       is the Wiener process.
Suppose that the joint distribution of at time        is known. Let
                              be a random sample of the size   from this
distribution. For each , we apply the BS technique to simulate the first
coordinate and the Brownian bridge construction to simulate the second
coordinate.
More precisely, consider the th random vector,                      ,
               . Simplifying the notation, denote         and          . Let us
generate the arrival moments of the Poisson process,                         .
As before, the arrival moments are obtained by sorting the sequence of
independent identically distributed random variables, having a uniform
distribution in the interval     , in ascending order.
The second coordinate of the process, , is generated recursively using the
Brownian bridge construction. Suppose that the process      has already been
generated at times                   and         . Then, at time        ,    has
a normal distribution,           , with the parameters




Consider now the correlation function,                     , of the process, ,
           . Our first result is the computation of the extreme correlations of this
process at time . After that we will prove that, as in the case of the BS
simulation of the Poisson processes, the correlation coefficient        in our case is
the linear function of time,              .
Let us now find the extreme values of the correlation coefficient,
                  . It is convenient to represent the random variable,          , as a
function of a normally distributed random variable,            ,             ,
where          . The random variable    can be represented as            , where
           is a random variable with the standard normal distribution. Then the
covariance of the Poisson and Wiener processes at time is



Since the variance of     is     , we find




Denote by     the correlation coefficient of and . Let us represent as
                   , where is a standard normal random variable independent
of . We have

                                                                              9.55
where                      . Let us compute      . The function      is piecewise
constant:              . Define           ,             . If               , then
                . Denote                   . Then we find




where     is the standard normal density function. The function    is a
smooth, monotone function of . Then, from (9.55) and the inequality,           ,
we obtain


  Proposition 9.6
  The correlation coefficient,       , satisfies the inequality

                                                                           9.56


Figure 9.9 displays the low and upper bounds for the correlation coefficient
      . Comparing Figures 9.7 and 9.9, we conclude that the correlation
boundaries in Proposition 9.6 are smooth, monotone, and symmetric, as opposed
to the boundaries in the case of the Poisson processes.




Figure 9.9 Correlation bounds.
Let us now study the correlation coefficient,                  .


  Proposition 9.7
  The correlation coefficient,    , is a linear function of time:

                                                                          9.57


  Proof
  Denote by         the joint density function of the Brownian motion and the
  Poisson process at time . We have




  Let




  be the generating function of the sequence        . Consider the function



  The function,    , is analytical in the area      ; its second derivative
  satisfies




  It is convenient to define the function



  Then we have

                                                                        9.58
  Taking into account that

                                                                        9.59
  we derive from (9.58) and (9.59)

                                                                        9.60

Let us apply the BS algorithm to the process     . The process    satisfies the
relation
where          . The relation between           and          can be derived as
follows. At time , we have




  Lemma 9.11
  The generating function,      , satisfies the equation

                                                                                  9.61


  where          and                 .



  Proof
  The density,         , satisfies




  We have




  Therefore, the generating function,          , satisfies (9.61), as was to be
  proved.
Let us finish the proof of Proposition 9.7. The joint generating function,         ,
is the Fourier transform of . Therefore,




Changing the order of integration, we obtain




The inner integral




Therefore,

                                                                                 9.62

where         . Differentiating (9.62) twice and substituting     ,       , we
obtain




Then, the latter relation and (9.60) immediately imply Equation (9.57).


  Remark 9.8
  We have considered the backward simulation of the process with Poisson
  and Wiener components. It is possible to extend this approach to the class of
  processes with mean-reverting components instead of Wiener processes. In
  processes with mean-reverting components instead of Wiener processes. In
  this case, the process has a nonlinear time structure of correlations.


9.8 Concluding Remarks
The backward simulation of the multivariate Poisson processes is based on the
conditional uniformity of the unsorted arrival moments. The BS allows us to
consider in a general framework both Gaussian and Poisson processes describing
the dynamics of risk factors. The BS approach to the Poisson processes results in
a bigger range of admissible correlations and simpler calibration algorithm.
The computation of the extreme distributions with maximal and minimal
correlations of the Poisson processes is solved by the EJD algorithm, proposed
in the present chapter, which has a simple probabilistic interpretation. This
algorithm has an intimate connection to the class of infinite-dimensional linear
optimization problems. It is interesting to understand its role in the analysis of
this class of optimization problems.
The boundaries for the correlation coefficients of the multivariate Poisson
process delivered by the EJD algorithm give necessary conditions for the
existence of the process. It looks natural to try to prove that these conditions are
also sufficient. A similar question can be formulated for the multivariate process
with the Wiener and Poisson components.
The BS approach is applicable to the class of mixed Poisson processes. These
models will be studied in our future publications.

Acknowledgments
I am very grateful to my colleagues Ian Iscoe, Yijun Jiang, Konrad Duch,
Helmut Mausser, Oleksandr Romanko, and Asif Lakhany for stimulating
discussions: without their support, this chapter would never have appeared.
Andrey Marchenko read the first draft of the paper and made a few important
comments and suggestions, especially regarding monotone distributions. I would
like to thank Isaac Sonin for his comments pointing at simplification of the
proofs and Monique Jeanblanc and Raphael Douady for fruitful discussions
during the 8th Bachelier Colloquium. Sebastian Jaimungal and Tianyi Jia made
numerous comments and suggestions helping me to write this chapter. Tianyi
also verified some of the proofs and derivations. I am very grateful to the
referees for their comments. Finally, I would like to thank Dmitry Malioutov for
referees for their comments. Finally, I would like to thank Dmitry Malioutov for
his interest in this project.

Appendix A
A.1 Proof of Lemmas 9.2 and 9.3
A.1.1 Proof of Lemma 9.2
Consider the function,           ,

                                                                             A.1


and denote by      the generating function




We have to show that

                                                                             A.2


The generating function      can be written as

                                                                             A.3


Denote              . Let us also introduce the partial sums




Then, from Equation (A.3), we find
                                                                             A.4




Consider the last sum,




Since               , we obtain




Applying this transformation recursively to the sums over   ,
                     , in (9.66) we derive




Lemma 9.7 is proved.


  Remark A.1
  Notice that if      ,         . The function      . Therefore,           is a
  probability distribution on the -dimensional integer lattice.


A.1.2 Proof of Lemma 9.3
Derivation of Equation (9.20) is completely analogous to that of Equation (9.12)
and, for this reason, is omitted. Let us derive (9.21).
From (9.20) we find, by differentiation                            :



and
and


Then we obtain


and



If the variance and the first moment of the random variables,   ,      , are
equal, then



Finally, we obtain



and Lemma 9.9 is thus proved.

References
Aue, F. and Kalkbrener, M. (2006). LDA at work: Deutsche Banks approach to
quantify operational risk. Journal of Operational Risk, 1(4), 49–95.
Avellaneda, M. and Zhu, J. (2001). Distance to default. Risk, 14(12), 125–129.
Badescu, A., Gang, L., Lin, S. and Tang, D. (2013). A mixture model approach
to operational risk management. Working paper. Toronto: University of
Toronto, Department of Statistics.
Badescu, A., Gang, L., Lin, S. and Tang, D. (2015). Modeling correlated
frequencies with applications in operational risk management. Journal of
Operational Risk, forthcoming.
Bae, T. (2012). A model for two-way dependent operational losses. Working
paper. Regina, SK: University of Regina, Department of Mathematics and
Statistics.
Barndorff-Nielsen, O. and Shephard, N. (2001). Non-Gaussian Ornstein–
Uhlenbeck-based models and some of their uses in financial economics. Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society, 63, 167–241.
Barndorff-Nielsen, O. and Yeo, G. (1969). Negative binomial processes. Journal
of Applied Probability, 6(3), 633–647.
Böcker, K. and Klüppelberg, C. (2010). Multivariate models for operational risk.
Quantitative Finance, 10(8), 855–869.
Boyarchenko, S. and Levendorski, S. (2002). Non-Gaussian Merton-Black-
Scholes theory. River Edge, NJ: World Scientific.
Carr, P. and Madan, D. (1998). Option valuation using the fast Fourier
transform. Journal of Computational Finance, 2, 61–73.
Chavez-Demoulin, V., Embrechts, P. and Nešlehovà, J. (2006). Quantitative
models for operational risk: extremes, dependence and aggregation. Journal of
Banking and Finance, 30(9), 2635–2658.
Cont, R. and Tankov, P. (2003). Financial modeling with jump processes.
London: Chapman and Hall, CRC Press.
Cont, R. and Tankov, P. (2006). Retrieving Levy processes from option prices:
regularization of an ill-posed inverse problem. SIAM Journal on Control and
Optimization, 45, 1–25.
Duch, K., Kreinin, A. and Jiang, Y. (2014). New approaches to operational risk
modeling. IBM Journal of Research and Development, 3, 31–45.
Embrechts, P. and Puccetti, G. (2006). Aggregating risk capital with an
application to operational risk. The Geneva Risk and Insurance Review, 31(2),
71–90.
Feigin, P. (1979). On the characterization of point processes with the order
statistic property. Journal of Applied Probability, 16(2), 297–304.
Fox, B. (1996). Generating Poisson processes by quasi-Monte Carlo. Working
paper. Boulder, CO: SIM-OPT Consulting.
Fox, B. and Glynn, P. (1988). Computing Poisson probabilities. Communication
of the ACM, 31, 440–445.
Frechet, M. (1951). Sur le tableaux de correlation dont les marges sont donnees.
Annales de l'Université de Lyon, 14, 53–77.
Griffiths, R., Milne, R. and Wood, R. (1979). Aspects of correlation in bivariate
Poisson distributions and processes. Australian Journal of Statistics, 21(3), 238–
255.
Hardy, G., Littlewood, J. and Polya, G. (1952). Inequalities. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hoeffding, W. (1940). Masstabinvariante korrelations-theorie. Schriften Math.
Inst. Univ. Berlin, 5, 181–233.
Hull, J. and White, A. (2001). Valuing credit default swaps II: modeling default
correlations. Journal of Derivatives, 8(3), 29–40.
Iscoe, I. and Kreinin, A. (2006). Recursive valuation of basket default swaps.
Journal of Computational Finance, 9(3), 95–116.
Iscoe, I. and Kreinin, A. (2007). Valuation of synthetic CDOs. Journal of
Banking and Finance, 31, 3357–3376.
Iscoe, I., Kreinin, A. and Rosen, D. (1999). Integrated market and credit risk
portfolio model. Algorithmics Research Quarterly, 2(3), 21–38.
Jaimungal, S., Kreinin, A. and Valov, A. (2013). The generalized Shiryaev
problem and Skorokhod embedding. Theory of Probabilities and Applications,
58(3), 614–623.
Johnson, N. and Kotz, S. (1969). Distributions in statistics: discrete
distributions. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Johnson, N., Kotz, S. and Balakrishnan, N. (1997). Discrete multivariate
distributions. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Kou, S. (2002). A jump diffusion model for option pricing. Management
Sciences, 48(8), 1086–1101.
Kyprianou, A., Schoutens, W. and Wilmott, P. (2005). Exotic option pricing and
advanced Levy models. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Lindskog, F. and McNeil, A.J. (2001). Poisson shock models: applications to
insurance and credit risk modeling. Zurich: Federal Institute of Technology
ETH Zentrum.
Lipton, A. and Rennie, A. (2008). Credit correlation: life after copulas. River
Edge, NJ: World Scientific.
Merton, R. (1974). On the pricing of corporate debt: the risk structure of interest
rates. Journal of Finance, 29, 449–470.
Merton, R. (1976). Option pricing when underlying stock returns are
discontinuous. Journal of Financial Economics, 3, 125–144.
Musiela, M. and Rutkowsky, M. (2008). Martingale methods in financial
modelling stochastic modelling. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Nawrotzki, K. (1962). Ein grenwertsatz für homogene züffalige punktfolgen
(verallgemeinerung eines satzes von A. Renyi). Mathematische Nachrichten, 24,
201–217.
Nelsen, R.B. (1987). Discrete bivariate distributions with givenmarginals and
correlation. Communications in Statistics –Simulation, 16(1), 199–208.
Nešlehovà, J., Embrechts, P. and Chavez-Demoulin, V. (2006). Infinite mean
models and the lda for operational risk. Journal of Operational Risk, 1(1), 3–25.
Panjer, H.H. (2006). Operational risks: modeling analytics. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons.
Peters, G., Shevchenko, P. and Wüthrich, M. (2009). Dynamic operational risk:
modeling dependence and combining different data sources of information. The
Journal of Operational Risk, 4(2), 69–104.
Powojovsky, M., Reynolds, D. and Tuenter, H. (2002). Dependent events and
operational risk. Algorithmics Research Quarterly, 5(2), 65–74.
Revus, D. and Yor, M. (1991). Continuous Martingales and Brownian motion: a
series of comprehensive studies in mathematics, 2nd ed. New York: Springer.
Rolski, T., Schmidli, H., Schmidt, V. and Teugles, J. (1999). Stochastic
processes for insurance and finance. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons.
Shevchenko, P. (2011). Modeling operational risk using modeling analytics.
New York: Springer.
Shreve, S. (2004). Stochastic calculus for finance II: continuous-time models –a
series of comprehensive studies in mathematics. New York: Springer-Finance.
Vasicek, O. (1987). Probability of loss on loan portfolio. Working paper. San
Francisco: KMW.
Vasicek, O. (2002). Loan portfolio value. Risk, 15, 160–162.
Whitt, W. (1976). Bivariate distributions with given marginals. Annals of
Statistics, 4, 1280–1289.
Yahav, I. and Shmueli, G. (2011). On generating multivariate Poisson data in
management science applications. Applied Stochastic Models in Business and
Industry, 28(1), 91–102.
1 Despite that each component of the process is an infinitely divisible Poisson

   process.
2 This version of the theorem is new, to the best of our knowledge.

3 The latter situation is regarded as the CSM.

4 The arrival moments here are not sorted (in ascending order).

5 For the sake of brevity, we will call       just generating function, in what
   follows.
6 As in the case of the Poisson distributions.

7 These problems are often numerically unstable.

8 If                             , then the vector      does not belong to the
   support.
9 The same approximation of the marginal distributions is used in all examples

   considered in this section.
10 This fact is established numerically. The joint probabilities should be
   computed with the error not exceeding             to provide proof of this fact.
Chapter 10
CVaR Minimizations in Support Vector Machines
   Jun-ya Gotoh1 and Akiko Takeda2
   1Chuo University, Japan
   2The University of Tokyo, Japan


How to measure the riskiness of a random variable has been a major concern of
financial risk management. Among the many possible measures, conditional
value at risk (CVaR) is viewed as a promising functional for capturing the
characteristics of the distribution of a random variable. CVaR has attractive
theoretical properties, and its minimization with respect to involved parameters
is often tractable. In portfolio selection especially, the minimization of the
empirical CVaR is a linear program. On the other hand, machine learning is
based on the so-called regularized empirical risk minimization, where a
surrogate of the empirical error defined over the in-sample data is minimized
under some regularization of the parameters involved. Considering that both
theories deal with empirical risk minimization, it is natural to look at their
interaction. In fact, a variant of support vector machine (SVM) known as -
SVM implicitly carries out a certain CVaR minimization, though the relation to
CVaR is not clarified at the time of the invention of -SVM.
This chapter overviews the connections between SVMs and CVaR minimization
and suggests further interactions beyond their similarity in appearance. Section
10.1 summarizes the definition and properties of CVaR. The authors wish this
section to be a quick introduction for those who are not familiar with CVaR.
Section 10.2 collects basic formulations of various SVMs for later reference.
Those who are familiar with SVM formulations can skip this section and consult
it when succeeding sections refer to the formulations therein. Section 10.3
provides CVaR minimization-based representations of the SVM formulations
given in Section 10.2. Section 10.4 is devoted to dual formulations of CVaR-
based formulations. Section 10.5 describes two robust optimization extensions of
these formulations. For further study, Section 10.6 briefly overviews the
literature regarding the interaction between risk measure theory and SVM.

10.1 What Is CVaR?
This section introduces CVaR as a risk measure of random variables and
This section introduces CVaR as a risk measure of random variables and
describes its relation to VaR and other statistics.

10.1.1 Definition and Interpretations
Let be a random variable defined on a sample space (i.e.,                     ), and
let it represent a quantity that we would like to minimize, such as payments,
costs, damages, or error. We figuratively refer to such random variables as
losses.1 In financial risk management, each element           can be interpreted as a
future state or scenario. Furthermore, let us suppose that all random variables are
associated with a probability measure on (and a set of events), satisfying
              . In most parts of this chapter, this assumption is satisfied because
losses are associated with empirical distributions based on finite observations,
and each loss is defined on a finite sample space (i.e.,                   ).
For a loss , a risk measure is a functional that maps to      , expressing
how risky is. Among the many risk measures, VaR is popular because it is
easy to interpret.


  Definition 10.1 (VaR (value-at-risk) or -
  quantile of loss)
  The VaR of     at a significant level          is defined as



The parameter is determined by decision makers such as fund managers. To
capture the possibility of a large loss that could occur with a small probability,
the parameter is typically set close to 1 in financial risk management (e.g.,
         or 0.999). While VaR can capture the upper tail of , it fails to capture
the impact of a loss beyond VaR. In addition, the lack of convexity makes VaR
intractable in risk management.2
CVaR has gained growing popularity as a convex surrogate to VaR.


  Definition 10.2 (CVaR or -superquantile of
  loss)
  The conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) of     with a significant level
  is defined as

                                                                             10.1


            is nondecreasing in    since the function     is nondecreasing in .
Note that for          , “inf” in the above formula is replaced with “min.”
Indeed, for         , Theorem 10 of Rockafellar and Uryasev (2002) shows that

                                                                                  10.2
where                                    . The relation (10.2) implies that any
minimizer in the formula (10.1) can be an approximate VaR and that if the
minimizer is unique,3 it is equal to VaR.
The definition (10.1) of CVaR implies that VaR is always bounded above by
CVaR, that is,



and                        unless there is no chance of a loss greater than VaR.
More specifically, CVaR is represented as a convex combination of VaR and
                   .4
Indeed, with                                      , it is true that

                                                                                  10.3
When follows a parametric distribution, CVaR may be explicitly given a
closed formula.


  Example 10.1 (CVaR under normal
  distribution)
  When follows a normal distribution             , CVaR can be explicitly
  expressed as
                                                                                 10.4

  where     is the cumulative distribution function of        (i.e.,
                             ). On the other hand,                           .

Note that (10.4) is equal to the conditional expectation of a loss exceeding VaR,
that is,



This relation also holds for other distributions as long as there is no probability
atom at            .
However, for general loss distributions and arbitrary    , the above equalities only
hold in an approximate manner. That is, we have



Usually, the loss distributions are not known, so an empirical distribution is used
as a surrogate of the true distribution. In such a case, there is a positive
probability atom at              for all        , and either of the equalities does
not hold (see Proposition 5 of Rockafellar and Uryasev (2002) for the details).


  Example 10.2 (CVaR under finite scenarios)
  Suppose that     is defined on a finite sample space                 equipped
  with                    ,           . For         , CVaR is given by




  where                   and                    .5 In this case, CVaR can be
  represented with a linear program (LP).

                                                                                 10.5
Note that (10.5) is feasible for any , , and (e.g.,
                                   with                   is a feasible
solution). The dual problem of (10.5) is derived as

                                                                           10.6



The solution        is feasible for (10.6) for any        , and therefore, the
optimal value of (10.6) is equal to              because of the strong duality
of LP (see, e.g., Vanderbei, 2014).
As will be elaborated on later, (10.6) suggests that CVaR can be interpreted
as the worst expected loss over a set of probability measures,
                                        . Note also that (10.6) can be viewed
as a variant of the continuous (or fractional) knapsack problem,6 and its
solution is obtained in a greedy manner as follows:7
   1. Sort the loss scenarios,        , in descending order, and let
   denote the -th largest component (i.e.,                     ), and      ,
   denote the reference probability corresponding to    .
   2. Find the integer satisfying                            . Let
   denote the element of the solution vector , corresponding to     in the
   objective of (10.6), and set         for          ,
   , and         for              . Consequently, CVaR is given by the
   formula

                                                                           10.7


   Formula (10.7) implies that CVaR is approximately equal to the mean of
   the largest         % losses            if               (see Figures
   10.1b and 10.1d).
Figure 10.1 CVaR, VaR, mean, and maximum of distribution. (a, c) The
cumulative distribution function (cdf) and the density of a continuous loss
distribution; (b, d) the cdf and histogram of a discrete loss distribution. In all
four figures, the location of VaR with           is indicated by a vertical
dashed line. In (c) and (d), the locations of CVaR and the mean of the
distributions are indicated with vertical solid and dashed-dotted lines. In (b)
and (d), the location of the maximum loss is shown for the discrete case.
Now let us consider the complementarity condition. Namely, for any optimal
solutions       and to (10.5) and (10.6), respectively, the condition




implies             ,           , and      ,                , where     is the
element of the optimal solution corresponding to        and   . Using this for
  the objective of (10.5) and comparing the result with (10.7), we find that
            . Note that




  where               is       of with          , that is,
  , where         is the 0–1 indicator function (i.e.,      if cond is true, 0
  otherwise). Accordingly, formula (10.7) is an expression (10.3) for the
  discrete distribution case.

CVaR can also be considered to be a generalization of the average and the
maximum of the underlying random variable.
   With        , CVaR is equal to the mean of the loss, that is,
   (or                            for the discrete distribution case).
   With close to 1, it approximates the largest loss. Indeed, in the case of a
   discrete distribution, it is true that                               for
               .
As a result of the nondecreasing property with respect to , CVaR is typically
between the maximum and mean for an intermediate                  (see Figure
10.1d).

10.1.2 Basic Properties of CVaR
The convexity of a risk functional often makes the associated risk minimization
tractable and enables us to exploit duality theory. Those advantages of the
convexity of CVaR are worth emphasizing again.
Let us consider a probabilistic representation. Letting   be the target level of
loss and          be the significant level, define

                                                                               10.8
In general, the set of losses satisfying (10.8) is nonconvex. To avoid this
nonconvexity, the left side of (10.8) is often approximated with a convex upper
bound of the form            , where is a convex function on such that
             for all       . Note that                implies
since                                  . The expression               is thus
called a conservative approximation of (10.8). To tighten the bound, it is enough
to consider a piecewise linear function                             with some
such that        (see Figure 10.2). Namely, (10.8) can be replaced with
                   , which becomes




Noting that this is equivalent to              , we can see that CVaR provides
a tight convex conservative approximation of the probabilistic condition (10.8).




Figure 10.2 Convex functions dominating            .
CVaR has three properties that are useful in financial risk management; CVaR is
   1. monotonic:                              when        ;
   2. translation invariant:                                    for all       ; and
   3. positively homogeneous:                                 for all     .
If a convex risk functional satisfies all three of these properties, it is said to be
coherent (Artzner et al., 1999).8 Monotonicity is a useful property in machine
learning contexts, whereas translation invariance and positive homogeneity exist
for technical reasons rather than for intuitive reasons. However, each of these
properties plays roles in tractability and in compatibility with regularization
terms (Gotoh and Uryasev, 2013).
In general, monotonicity, translation invariance, and positive homogeneity can
be characterized in a dual manner. To avoid unnecessary technicalities, we will
assume a finite sample space                   (i.e., which implies that risk
functionals are functions on          9
                                    ). Let us define     to be the conjugate of ,
that is,                         . Furthermore, let us define dom as the
effective domain of , that is, dom                               .
  Theorem 10.1 (dual characterization of risk
  functional properties (Ruszczyński and
  Shapiro, 2006))
  Suppose that                     is an l.s.c.,10 proper,11 and convex function.
  Accordingly:
     1.    is monotonic if and only if          is in the nonnegative orthant.
     2.    is translation invariant if and only if            ,        .
     3. is positively homogeneous if and only if        can be represented in
     the form

                                                                             10.9

See Ruszczyński and Shapiro (2006) for the proof.
In particular, from (10.9), we can see that any l.s.c. proper positively
homogeneous convex risk functional can be characterized by the effective
domain of its conjugate, which is referred to as the risk envelope. Let us denote
the risk envelope of CVaR by             (i.e.,                          ).
Noting that the dual LP (10.6) is written in the form of (10.9), the risk envelope
of CVaR is

                                                                                 10.10
Figure 10.3 illustrates an example of the risk envelope of CVaR with          . The
conjugate of CVaR is given by



where is the indicator function of a set (i.e.,             if       , and
otherwise). Since                                          , the dual LP (10.6) is
symbolically represented as the worst-case expected loss over a set of
probabilities, that is,

                                                                                 10.11
Indeed, any coherent function on    can be characterized by using a non-empty
closed convex set in    in place of        (see, e.g., Artzner et al., 1999).




Figure 10.3 Illustration of         in a discrete distribution on    with
                          . This figure shows how              varies depending
on (                  ). As approaches 1,                approaches the unit
simplex  . The risk envelope shrinks to the point
as decreases to 0.

10.1.3 Minimization of CVaR
Now, let us consider the case where the loss is defined with one or more
parameters, and find the parameter values that minimize CVaR.
Let the loss be parametrized with          (i.e.,  ), and suppose that the
probability is independent of . Rockafellar and Uryasev (2002) prove the
following theorem.


  Theorem 10.2 (CVaR minimization)
  Let                                   , and let        denote the set of
  admissible   , and                        . Then,
         1.                                          .
         2.                           and                                    .
         3. Furthermore, if      is convex with respect to   , then so are both
                      and          .
         4. If  is homogeneous with respect to (i.e., for any       ,
                   ), then both             and        are positively
         homogeneous with respect to   .

The first property states that the minimization of CVaR reduces to simultaneous
minimization of the function           in and . The second statement
guarantees that the interpretation of the variable as an approximate VaR (i.e.,
  -quantile of ) remains valid even in the case of CVaR minimization. The
third property states that the associated CVaR minimization is a convex
minimization if        is convex in . The fourth property, which is not exactly
stated in Rockafellar and Uryasev (2002), is that the (positive) homogeneity of
the loss propagates to that of CVaR in terms of the involved parameters. As will
be discussed in Section 10.3, this property plays a role in analyzing the form of a
regularized empirical CVaR minimization.


  Example 10.3 (CVaR-minimizing portfolio
  selection)
  Let         denote a random rate of return of an investable asset , and suppose
  that                     follows a discrete distribution satisfying



  Let denote the investment ratio of asset . To make the investment self-
  financing, we impose a constraint             . In addition, to meet the
  investor's requirements, several constraints are imposed on . We will
  impose, for example, a restriction of the form             with upper bounds
          and          using the expected return            and the minimum
  target return      . The problem of determining a portfolio              that
  minimizes CVaR defined with                  (or, equivalently,
                         with                   ) is an LP:
 Typically, a discrete distribution is obtained from historical observations, for
 example, periodic asset returns (e.g., daily, weekly, or monthly) in real
 markets, and           is used unless there is particular information about
 .12




 Example 10.4 (CVaR-based passive portfolio
 selection)
 Strategies seeking to mimic market indexes such as the S&P 500 (i.e., a
 certain average of asset prices) are popular in portfolio management.13 Let
 denote the return of an index, and assume that                follows a discrete
 distribution satisfying                                  and
                                 . Measure the deviation of the portfolio return
       from the benchmark return by using the CVaR associated with the
 loss                  (or, equivalently,                                  with
                    ). The problem of finding a portfolio mimicking the index
 can then be formulated as




10.2 Support Vector Machines
SVMs are one of the most successful supervised learning methods that can be
applied to classification or regression. This section introduces several SVM
applied to classification or regression. This section introduces several SVM
formulations, whose relation to CVaR minimization will be discussed in the
succeeding sections.

10.2.1 Classification
Suppose that we have       samples         ,            , where
                        denotes the vector of the attributes of sample and
               denotes its binary label,             . SVM classification (or SVC,
for short) finds a hyperplane,           , that separates the training samples as
much as possible. The labels of the new (unknown) samples can be predicted on
the basis of which side of the hyperplane they fall on.
By using the so-called kernel trick, SVC constructs a nonlinear classifier, a
hyperplane in a high (possibly, infinite) dimensional space. Namely, it implicitly
uses a mapping                ( can be infinite) and obtains a hyperplane
           and a decision function                        , where        is 1 if
      and    otherwise.
The Vapnik–Chervonenkis theory shows that a large geometric margin classifier
has a small generalization error (Vapnik, 1995). Namely, the search for a
hyperplane that has the largest distance to the nearest data points decreases the
upper bound of the out-of-sample error. Motivated by this theoretical result,
Boser et al. (1992) developed an algorithm for finding a hyperplane          with
the maximum geometric margin, which is formulated as

                                                                             10.12

where      denotes the    -norm (or the Euclidean norm), that is,                    .
If the data samples are linearly separable, that is, there exists a hyperplane that
separates the samples such that            from those such that           , as in
Figure 10.4, the fractional optimization (10.12) can be rewritten as the following
quadratic program:

                                                                             10.13


This is called hard-margin SVC. Note that (10.13) is valid only when the
training samples are linearly separable.
Figure 10.4 Two separating hyperplanes and their geometric margins. The
dataset is said to be linearly separable if there exist         and such that
                 for all           . If the dataset is linearly separable, there are
infinitely many hyperplanes separating the dataset. According to generalization
theory (Vapnik, 1995), the hyperplane               is preferable to          . The
optimization problem (10.12) (or, equivalently, (10.13)) finds a hyperplane that
separates the datasets with the largest margin.

10.2.1.1    -Support Vector Classification
Cortes and Vapnik (1995) extend the SVC algorithm to linearly nonseparable
cases and trade off the margin size with the data separation error. More
precisely, by introducing slack variables          and adding their sum to the
objective function, the hard-margin SVC formulation can be modified into

                                                                               10.14



where         is a user-defined parameter. Formulation (10.14) is often viewed as
a correction that adds the so-called hinge loss                  with
                     , as a surrogate of the 0–1 loss        , which would
otherwise involve nonconvexity.14 Formulation (10.14) is usually referred to as
  -SVC,15 and it has been shown to work very well in various real-world
applications (see, e.g., Schölkopf and Smola, 2002).
The (Lagrangian) dual formulation of (10.14) is derived as

                                                                               10.15


Here,                     is a kernel function defined directly on the inputs of
and . The use of a kernel function is preferable to that of the explicit mapping
   , because we can treat a highly nonlinear mapping without bothering about
how large the dimension of the mapped space should be.
Moreover, by using the optimality condition, we can recover a dual solution
from a primal solution.16 With an optimal solution             , the decision
function is given by




10.2.1.2 -Support Vector Classification
 -SVC is another formulation of soft-margin SVC (Schölkopf et al., 2000),

                                                                               10.16



where           is a user-defined parameter. The dual of (10.16) is described as

                                                                               10.17



Formulation (10.17) indicates that the optimal value of (10.16) as well as (10.17)
is non-increasing with respect to . Moreover, the optimal value is nonpositive
(or unbounded) because                is feasible for (10.16).
Note that (10.17) is not necessarily well defined for any    between 0 and 1
(Chang and Lin, 2001; Crisp and Burges, 2000). Let       (resp. ) denote the
number of samples with positive (resp. negative) labels. When is larger than
                       , we can show that the primal -SVC (10.16) is
unbounded and the dual -SVC (10.17) becomes infeasible. On the other hand,
when is smaller than some threshold        , -SVC produces a trivial solution
satisfying          (Chang and Lin, 2001). The lower threshold      is defined
as the smallest upper bound of with which the optimal value of -SVC
becomes zero.17
Schölkopf et al., (2000) show that the relation between -SVC and        -SVC is as
follows.


  Theorem 10.3 (Schölkopf et al. 2000)
  Suppose that (10.16) has an optimal solution         with       . Then
  (10.14) with           provides the same decision function as (10.16) does.

Crisp and Burges (2000) show that an optimal solution of -SVC (10.16)
satisfies    . In the above sense, -SVC and -SVC are equivalent except for
the case of     .

10.2.1.3 Extended -Support Vector Classification
Recall that for           , -SVC produces a trivial solution satisfying
. To prevent this, Perez-Cruz et al. (2003) require the norm of to be unity:

                                                                             10.18




As a result of this modification, a nontrivial solution can be obtained even for
           . This modified formulation is called extended -SVC (E -SVC).
Problem (10.18) is nonconvex because of the equality-norm constraint
.18 For             , E -SVC has the same optimal solutions as -SVC does
and can be reduced to -SVC. Perez-Cruz et al. (2003) experimentally show that
the out-of-sample performance of E -SVC with              is often better than
that with              .

10.2.1.4 One-class -Support Vector Classifications
Next, we will consider a problem that has been referred to as outlier/novelty
detection, high-density region estimation, or domain description.19
Let                       be a given dataset. The one-class problem is to define
(possible) outliers in . An outlier detection model known as a one-class -
support vector machine (Schölkopf and Smola, 2002) is formulated as

                                                                               10.19



where            is a user-defined parameter. With an optimal solution              ,
a sample satisfying                   is regarded as an “outlier.” Or, equivalently,
we can define a high-density region to be the set                           . We
will see in Section 10.3.1 that the (10.19) formulation can be interpreted on the
basis of CVaR.
Support vector domain description (SVDD) (Tax and Duin, 1999) is a variant of
the one-class problem. It detects (possible) outliers on the basis of the
quadratically constrained optimization problem,

                                                                               10.20



where        is a user-defined parameter. SVDD defines outliers as points
satisfying                   by using an optimal solution            of (10.20).
Since the high-density region of is defined as                              , this
type of problem is called high-density region estimation or domain description.
The high-density region is compact even when       is a linear mapping, whereas
one-class -SVM (10.19) is not compact then.

10.2.2 Regression
Following its success in classification, SVC was extended so that it could handle
real-valued outputs (Drucker et al., 1997), (Schölkopf et al., 2000). The support
vector regression (SVR) method performs well in regression analysis and is a
popular data analysis tool in machine learning and signal processing.
Let us consider the regression problem of obtaining a model
using training samples,                    , where        is an input and
       is the corresponding output value.

10.2.2.1 -Support Vector Regression
In the -SVR framework (Drucker et al., 1997), the model, or equivalently,
      , is determined so that the following regularized empirical risk functional is
minimized:




where and are positive constants. Among the two parameters,               is a
regularization constant that controls the trade-off between the goodness-of-fit
and the complexity of the model. The parameter controls the sensitivity to the
residuals (i.e.,                ). A potential weakness of the -SVR formulation
is that the choice of is not intuitive.20

10.2.2.2 -Support Vector Regression
Another formulation of SVR, called -SVR, was proposed by Schölkopf et al.
(2000); it uses a parameter       , instead of in -SVR. The optimization
formulation of -SVR is

                                                                              10.21




where       is a user-defined constant. By setting   and restricting           , the
(10.21) formulation reduces to the -SVR formulation.

10.3 -SVMs as CVaR Minimizations
In this section, we reformulate several SVMs in terms of CVaR minimization.
We classify the CVaR minimizations into two cases: Case 1, where the loss
is homogeneous with respect to the involving parameters (i.e., for any            ,
           ); and Case 2, where the loss     is not homogeneous.

10.3.1 -SVMs as CVaR Minimizations with Homogeneous
Loss
We can formulate various machine-learning methods by using different types of
loss. Let us begin with a binary classification problem defined with the
positively homogeneous loss.

10.3.1.1 -SVC as a CVaR Minimization
Using the notation of CVaR with a linear loss                         and
         ,          , the quadratic program (10.16) can be symbolically
rewritten as

                                                                              10.22

with       , where




Note that (10.22) is a regularized empirical risk minimization in which CVaR is
used as the empirical risk (see Figure 10.5). Note also that the empirical risk part
in (10.22) is homogeneous in        . To deal with the trade-off between the
regularization term and the empirical CVaR, we may be able to perform another
form of optimization,

                                                                              10.23

and21

                                                                              10.24
where , , and are positive parameters for reconciling the trade-off. Under
a mild assumption, the above three regularized empirical risk minimizations are
equivalent for any positive parameters     , and (see Tsyurmasto et al.,
2013).22 Accordingly,       , and   can be restricted to 1. For example, (10.24)
can be restricted to

                                                                             10.25


It is worth emphasizing that the equivalence of (10.22), (10.23), and (10.24) (or
(10.25)) relies on the homogeneity of the empirical CVaR with respect to         .
Conversely, such an equivalence also holds true for any positively homogeneous
risk functionals      in combination with a homogeneous loss        , that is,
        . On the other hand, with the hinge loss employed in -SVC (10.14), a
risk-constrained variant like (10.23) is infeasible for any    , and a parallel
equivalence is no longer valid.




Figure 10.5 -SVC as a CVaR minimization. The figure on the left shows an
optimal separating hyperplane                     given by -SVC (           ). The
one on the right is a histogram of the optimal distribution of the negative margin,
                                   . The locations of the minimized CVaR (solid
line) and the corresponding VaR (broken line) are indicated in the histogram.

10.3.1.2 E -SVC as the Geometric Margin-based CVaR Minimization
E -SVC (10.18) can be symbolically rewritten as
                                                                                  10.26


Comparing (10.25) and (10.26), we can see that -SVC (10.25) is a convex
relaxation of E -SVC (10.26).




Figure 10.6 Minimized CVaR and corresponding VaR with respect to . CVaR
indicates the optimal value of E -SVC (10.26) for binary classification.        is
the value of at which the optimal value becomes zero. For              , E -SVC
(10.26) reduces to -SVC (10.25). For            , -SVC (10.25) results in a
trivial solution, while E -SVC (10.26) still attains a nontrivial solution with the
positive optimal value.
Note that when is in the range                 , the optimal value of (10.25) (i.e., the
minimum CVaR) is negative, and                  is attained at optimality because of
the homogeneity of the objective function. In other words, when               , the
equality constraint             in (10.26) can be relaxed to            without
changing the optimal solution. On the other hand, when               , -SVC (10.25)
results in a trivial solution satisfying            23
                                                   . Therefore, to obtain a solution
to E -SVM (10.26) for               , a nonconvex optimization method needs to be
applied (Gotoh and Takeda, 2005; Perez-Cruz et al., 2003; Takeda and
Sugiyama, 2008). Figure 10.6 illustrates the relation between the sign of the
optimal value of E -SVC (10.26) and .
Note that (10.18) can be equivalently rewritten as

                                                                            10.27

(Takeda and Sugiyama, 2008). Namely, E -SVC (10.18) can be described as
another CVaR minimization problem,




by adopting the negative geometric margin as the loss, that is,
                                ,           . Since CVaR includes the maximum
loss as a special limiting case (see Section 10.1.1), formulation (10.27) is a
generalization of the maximum margin formulation (10.12). Figure 10.7
summarizes the relations among the four CVaR minimizations.




Figure 10.7 Relations among four classification formulations. The two
formulations on the left are equivalent to the standard -SVC (10.16), while
those on the right are equivalent to E -SVC (10.18). By resolving the
nonconvexity issues that arise from the equality constraint, E -SVC provides a
classifier that cannot be attained by -SVC.

10.3.1.3 One-class -SVC as a CVaR Minimization
With                  and regularization term        , we obtain a CVaR
minimization,
                                                                                 10.28

which is equivalent to one-class -SVC (10.19).24 Namely, outliers found by
(10.19) are viewed as points having values          greater than the      -
percentile under the CVaR minimizer .

10.3.2 -SVMs as CVaR Minimizations with
Nonhomogeneous Loss
Next, we consider cases where the loss is not homogeneous with respect to the
involved parameters.

10.3.2.1 CVaR-based Regression and -SVR
Assuming a regression model                   , we can employ a loss of the form
                             , where                 . Note that this is no longer
homogeneous in         . By using this loss and , we can readily attain a
regression version of CVaR minimization:

                                                                                 10.29

In particular, when    , (10.29) includes a number of popular regression
formulations. For example:
   With             and            , (10.29) is equivalent to ordinary least squares
   (OLS).
   With arbitrary            and          , it is equivalent to a weighted least square
   with a weight vector      .
   With             and          for      and                 for     with some
            , (10.29) is equivalent to quantile regression (Koenker and Bassett,
   1978).
By adding a certain regularizer, we can attain more generalized formulations:

                                                                                 10.30
where       is a constant,                          a nondecreasing function, and
   a norm. For example:
   With       ,         ,      , and                       , it is equivalent to ridge
   regression (Hoerl and Kennard, 1970).
     With       ,         ,         , and             , it is equivalent to lasso
     regression (Tibshirani, 1996).
See Chapter 11 written by Uryasev for the definitions and a general look at ridge
regression and lasso.
If   , (10.30) is related to -SVR. Indeed, with           ,       , and
             , it is equivalent to -SVR (10.21). Figure 10.8 shows the results
of -SVR and the distribution of the residual.




Figure 10.8 -SVR as a CVaR minimization. The left figure shows the
regression model               given by -SVR (            ). The right one shows
the histogram of the optimal distribution of the residual
                          . The locations of the minimized CVaR (green solid
line) and the corresponding VaR (red dashed line) are indicated in the histogram.
Different from formulations (10.16) and (10.19) for the classification problem,
formulation (10.21) depends on a trade-off parameter in addition to .
Indeed, the value of changes the decision function        of (10.21). (10.21) is
also different from the norm-constrained formulation:
                                                                            10.31




unless and        are appropriately set. This dependence on the parameters is due
to the lack of positive homogeneity of the loss       . On the other hand, the
CVaR minimization (10.29) has an optimal solution for any             , unlike -
SVC.

10.3.2.2 Domain Description Problems as CVaR Minimizations
If we use a loss of the form                     with a nondecreasing convex
function defined over          and a norm     , we arrive at another CVaR
minimization,



which can be explicitly rewritten as a convex optimization problem,

                                                                            10.32



In particular, when we employ               ,  , and         , it is
equivalent to SVDD (10.20). Namely, SVDD minimizes the CVaR of the
distribution of the squared Euclidean distance       from a center .
Formulation (10.32) can be considered to be a generalized version of the so-
called minimum enclosing ball. Indeed, let us suppose that is an increasing
function. When          , formulation (10.32) becomes the optimization for
obtaining a minimum ball enclosing the set of points                  :




On the other hand, when        , (10.32) becomes
which is known to characterize various centers of points
depending on the norm     employed.25

10.3.3 Refining the -Property
So far, we have shown that -SVMs can be viewed as CVaR minimizations,
each being associated with a certain loss function. This fact enables us to look at
SVMs on the basis of the distribution of the loss,            , as described in
Section 10.1.

10.3.3.1 -property
An advantage of -SVM over         -SVM is that     can be interpreted on the basis
of the so-called -property.
The -property is usually defined using the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT)
condition (see, e.g., Vanderbei (2014) for the KKT condition). More precisely,
let us consider -SVC (10.16). Given an optimal solution                     to
(10.16) and     to (10.17), let us denote the set of samples that contribute to the
margin error and the set of support vectors (SVs) by



where                . Accordingly, the margin error and number of SVs can be
expressed as       and     . Note that         and

                                                                               10.33

  Proposition 10.1 ( -property (Schölkopf et al.,
  2000))
  Any KKT solution to -SVC (10.16) or (10.17) satisfies




This proposition says that    is an upper bound of the fraction of margin errors
and a lower bound of the fraction of SVs.26
Because of (10.33), we can see that the number of SVs is bounded above by a
number depending on , as well. Indeed, we have



10.3.3.2 Quantile-based -property
The -property described above depends on the KKT condition of the
optimization problems (10.16) and (10.17). However, the interpretation of       is
independently obtained from the definition of the quantile (i.e., VaR).
Let us refine the margin errors and support vectors with the notion of VaR.
Denoting


we can define the quantile-based margin error as              . Furthermore, we
can denote the set of quantile-based support vectors by



Note that the difference between          and             is only in the equality in
the above definitions. Indeed, we have
                                                      , and the following
proposition is straightforward.


  Proposition 10.2
  The following holds for any     :




Similarly to the standard notion of SVs, the following holds:

                                                                               10.34
Note that the inequalities in Proposition 10.2 are valid for any , whereas the
ordinary -property of Proposition 10.10 i shown for a KKT solution (i.e., an
optimal solution). By separately defining the risk functional and optimization as
in Sections 10.1.1 and 10.1.3, we can introduce the -property independently of
the optimality condition. Accordingly, the above relation (10.34) suggests that
the number of SVs can be reduced by making small.

10.3.3.3 Generalization Bounds for -SVC and E -SVC
The goal of learning methods is to obtain a classifier or a regressor that has a
small generalization error. As mentioned in Section 10.2.1, the maximum margin
hyperplane of hard-margin SVC minimizes an upper bound of the generalization
error. This is considered as the reason why a high generalization performance
can be obtained by hard-margin SVC for linearly separable datasets. Here, we
give generalization error bounds based on the CVaR risk measure for -SVC
and E -SVC and show that minimizing CVaR leads to a lower generalization
bound, which will explain why a high generalization performance can be
obtained by -SVC and E -SVC for linearly nonseparable datasets.
A classifier                         is learned on a training set. Here, we assume
that such training samples are drawn from an unknown independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d.) probability distribution       on            . The
goal of the classification task is to obtain a classifier (precisely,        of )
that minimizes the generalization error defined as



which corresponds to the misclassification rate for unseen test samples, but
unfortunately,        cannot be computed since is unknown. A bound on the
generalization error is derived, as discussed further here, and used for theoretical
analysis of the learning model.
We begin with the case of                 , where E -SVC is equivalent to -
SVC.


  Theorem 10.4 (Takeda and Sugiyama, 2008)
  Let                and                       . Suppose that        has support
  in a ball of radius around the origin. Then, for all        such that
  and                        , there exists a positive constant such that the
  following bound holds with a probability of at least      :
                                                                              10.35



  where




  The generalization error bound in (10.35) is furthermore upper-bounded as



The function      decreases as        increases. Note also that for              , -
SVC and, equivalently, E -SVC attain a negative minimum CVaR, that is,
                             (see Section 10.3.1). Accordingly, Theorem 10.4
implies that the minimum generalization bound regarding             is attained at an
optimal solution of -SVC (10.25), which minimizes
subject to         . That is, it is expected that the classifier of -SVC has a
small generalization (i.e., out-of-sample) error.
Next, we consider the case of            , for which -SVC results in a trivial
solution satisfying       , but E -SVC leads to a reasonable solution. The
discussion below depends on the sign of VaR (see Figure 10.6, where the range
        is divided into two subranges corresponding to a negative VaR or a
nonnegative VaR).


  Theorem 10.5 (Takeda and Sugiyama, 2008)
  Let             , and let      satisfy          .
        Additionally, if        satisfies                  , there exists a
        positive constant such that the following bound holds with a
        probability of at least       :



        On the other hand, if     satisfies                     , there exists a
        positive constant such that the following bound holds with a
        probability of at least  :
This theorem implies that the upper bound or lower bound of         can be
lowered if                     is reduced; indeed, minimizing
                   with respect to        subject to
minimizes the upper bound, while minimizing                        subject to
                       minimizes the lower bound. Recalling that VaR is upper-
bounded by CVaR and that E -SVC (10.26) is a CVaR minimization subject to
         , E -SVC is expected to reduce the generalization error through
minimization of the upper bound or lower bound.

10.4 Duality
In this section, we present the dual problems of the CVaR-minimizing
formulations in the Section 10.3. As mentioned in Section 10.2, dual
representations expand the range of algorithms and enrich the theory of SVM.

10.4.1 Binary Classification
As explained in Section 10.1.3, optimization problems (10.22) with        and
(10.25) (i.e., (10.24) with      ), are equivalent formulations of -SVC because
of the positive homogeneity of CVaR and the loss                        .
Correspondingly, the dual formulations of the CVaR-based representations
(10.22) with         and (10.25) can be derived as

                                                                          10.36


and

                                                                          10.37


with          .27
By using a kernel function                , we can readily obtain a kernelized
nonlinear classification. Indeed, letting       and replacing the objective
functions of (10.36) and (10.37) with          and              , respectively,
each of them becomes a kernelized formulation.
10.4.2 Geometric Interpretation of -SVM
Observe that             can be rewritten as                  and that




where                               , and                  . With a change of
variables         , the duals (10.36) and (10.37) can be rewritten as




where



where             and           denote vectors whose elements come from
corresponding to        and       , respectively.28 Accordingly, the dual problems
can be interpreted as ones of finding the nearest two points each belonging to
and     (see Figure 10.9). These sets,      and , are referred to as reduced
convex hulls or soft convex hulls in Bennett and Bredensteiner (2000) and Crisp
and Burges (2000). Indeed, for           , they are equivalent to the convex hulls
of                 and               , respectively; the size of set
monotonically decreases in , that is,             for        ; for       , they
shrink to their centers            .
Figure 10.9 Two-dimensional examples of reduced convex hulls. Here, ‘+’ and ‘
 ’ represent the data samples. As increases, the size of each reduced convex
hull shrinks. The reduced convex hull is a single point for        , whereas it is
equal to the convex hull for sufficiently close to 0. For linearly inseparable
datasets, the corresponding convex hulls (or the reduced convex hulls for a small
  ) intersect, and the primal formulation (10.25) results in a trivial solution
satisfying           .

10.4.3 Geometric Interpretation of the Range of                      for -SVC
Crisp and Burges (2000) pointed out that      is the largest such that two
reduced convex hulls     and     intersect. Namely,       is the value such that
     and      touch externally. Indeed,      can be computed by solving the
following optimization problem:
Note that this problem reduces to an LP.
On the other hand, if is smaller than      ,   and     intersect, and thus, -
SVC attains zero optimal value. This is the geometric interpretation of the trivial
solution mentioned in Section 10.2.1.
However, to make    and    non-empty, we need to choose          satisfying
     and         . Consequently,   is defined as                   .

10.4.4 Regression
The dual problems for regression (10.21) can be derived in a similar way as the
SVC formulations. Using the notation                      , the (kernelized) dual
formulation of (10.21) can be symbolically represented by

                                                                              10.38


where                  with a kernel function                . On the other
hand, the dual of the norm-constrained version (10.31) can be symbolically
represented by

                                                                              10.39



10.4.5 One-class Classification and SVDD
The (kernelized) dual formulations of the CVaR-based one-class classification
(10.28) are given by

                                                                              10.40


On the other hand, the dual of the CVaR-based SVDD (10.32) is derived as
10.5 Extensions to Robust Optimization
Modelings
The assumptions of machine-learning theory do not always fit real situations.29
Some modifications can be made to bridge the gap between theory and practice.
Among them is the robust optimization modeling (Ben-Tal et al., 2009) option.
In this section, we show that two kinds of robust modeling of the CVaR
minimization for binary classification are tractable.

10.5.1 Distributionally Robust Formulation
The uniform distribution             is reasonable as long as the dataset is i.i.d.
sampled. However, if this does not hold true, the choice             may not be the
best. Let us tackle such uncertainties in the choice of the reference probability
with a min-max strategy. Let            be the set of possible , and let us call it
the uncertainty set. For simplicity, we will assume that is closed and bounded.
For some , we replace                    with the distributionally worst-case
CVaR, defined by                     .
Recalling (10.11), the worst-case CVaR is represented by




The second equality holds because of the linearity of the function        (see
Figure 10.10 for an illustration of a convex hull of the union of risk envelopes).
Note that the above expression shows that the distributionally worst-case CVaR
is coherent as long as                     . (Recall the dual representation of the
coherent risk measure described in Section 10.1.2.) Consequently, the
distributionally robust -SVC can be written as

                                                                             10.41
Similar to the case of (10.37), the (kernelized) dual form of (10.41) is derived
as30

                                                                             10.42



For some , problem (10.42) becomes a tractable convex optimization. Here are
special cases of the examples given in Gotoh and Uryasev (2013).




Figure 10.10 Convex hull of the union of risk envelopes (        ).


  Example 10.5 (Finite-scenario uncertainty)
  If we employ an uncertainty set defined by                 , with   candidates
               , (10.42) can be rewritten as




  This formulation was first presented in Wang (2012), which extends the
  robust formulation to a multiclass classification setting.


  Example 10.6 (Distance-based uncertainty)
  Example 10.6 (Distance-based uncertainty)
  If we use an uncertainty set defined by                                ,
  with         , the symmetric positive definite matrix         , and    a
  norm in     , (10.42) can be rewritten as




  Example 10.7 (Entropy-based uncertainty)
  If we use an uncertainty set defined by                                 ,
  with       and         such that      , (10.42) can be rewritten as




These convex optimization problems can be solved using off-the-shelf nonlinear
programming solver software packages.

10.5.2 Measurement-wise Robust Formulation
Aside from the distributionally robust formulation in Section 10.5.1, another
form of uncertainty can be introduced to CVaR defined with a linear loss such as
                       and               .
Recall that classifiers obtained by SVCs depend on the support vectors, which
typically make up a small subset of samples. Accordingly, they are likely to be
susceptible to the measurement error of a sample, that is,               . To
mitigate the effect of such a perturbation, we may be able to use the min-max
strategy, similarly to the case of distributionally robust optimization.
Let us define the set of perturbations as
where       is some norm in    . Given   , the worst-case CVaR is defined as



This worst-case CVaR enables us to consider variants of -SVC. For example,
CVaR minimization (10.25) can be modified into

                                                                             10.43


whereas the usual -SVC (10.22) can be modified into

                                                                             10.44

Note that (10.43) and (10.44) are formulated as min-max optimizations.
However, we can represent a robust optimization in a tractable manner by using
the following formula.31


  Proposition 10.3 (Gotoh and Uryasev, 2013)
  For any       , we have

                                                                            10.45
  where       is the dual norm of   , that is,                        .

On the basis of formula (10.45), the robust -SVC formulations (10.43) and
(10.44) can be rewritten as




and

                                                                             10.46

Note that in defining , we do not have to limit the norm     to being the      -
norm. Indeed, if          is used, formulation (10.46) virtually has a
regularization term of the form                 , since          . In this sense,
the min-max strategy yields a justification of the modified regularization term
used in the elastic net (Zou and Hastie, 2005).32

10.6 Literature Review
In this final section, we briefly summarize the related literature and further
extensions to the results described in this chapter.

10.6.1 CVaR as a Risk Measure
The term CVaR was originally introduced by Rockafellar and Uryasev (2000),
and tail VaR and expected shortfall are sometimes used for signifying the same
notion. Rockafellar and Uryasev (2000) show that its minimization can be
represented by an LP and the optimal in the minimization formula yields an
approximate VaR. Rockafellar and Uryasev (2002) extensively analyze the basic
properties of CVaR and its minimization for general distributions.
On the other hand, the empirical CVaR minimization requires a large number of
scenarios to make an accurate estimation. Indeed, Lim et al. (2011) demonstrate
by simulation that CVaR minimization leads to poor out-of-sample performance.

10.6.2 From CVaR Minimization to SVM
Gotoh and Takeda (2005) were the first to describe the connection between
CVaR minimization and -SVM (actually, E -SVC), while Takeda and
Sugiyama (2008) were the first to point out that the model of Gotoh and Takeda
(2005) is equivalent to E -SVC.
Regarding the robustification of CVaR minimization, Zhu and Fukushima
(2009) proposed a distributionally robust portfolio selection. They consider finite
scenarios and norm-based uncertainty and formulate convex optimization
problems without the dual representation of CVaR. Wang (2012) uses a similar
robust optimization modeling to formulate a distributionally robust multiclass -
SVC. Gotoh et al. (2014) and Gotoh and Uryasev (2013) extend this robust
modeling to the cases of coherent and convex functionals. Indeed, they extend
the examples in Section 10.5.2 to non-CVaR functionals.
As for the measurement-wise robust -SVC, Gotoh and Uryasev (2013) show
that any monotonic and translation-invariant functional results in a regularized
empirical functional, as in Proposition 10.3.
10.6.3 From SVM to CVaR Minimization
On the other hand, the notions used in SVMs can be used in portfolio selection.
Indeed, the two examples of portfolio optimization at the end of Section 10.1.3
are constrained versions of one-class -SVC and -SVR. Gotoh and Takeda
(2011) present a regularized CVaR minimization by placing a norm constraint
on the portfolio vector. They use regularization in the same way as in DeMiguel
et al. (2009), where the variance-minimizing portfolio is coupled with a norm
constraint. They develop generalization bounds for a portfolio selection based on
the norm-constrained VaR or CVaR minimization. Gotoh and Takeda (2012)
also develop generalization error bounds for portfolio selection and devise a
fractional optimization problem on the basis of the empirical VaR and CVaR. El
Karoui et al. (2012) use the asymptotic variance of the empirical CVaR as a
regularizer.

10.6.4 Beyond CVaR
CVaR is the most popular coherent measure of risk (Artzner et al. 1999). The
coherence of CVaR was proven by Pflug (2000) as well as by Rockafellar and
Uryasev (2002). It is easy to see how such a generalized class of risk measures
can be incorporated in SVMs. Gotoh et al. (2014) apply a coherent measure of
risk to SVMs in place of the CVaR of the geometric margin. By making a
straightforward extension of the maximum margin SVC, they can use a negative
geometric margin as the loss and deal with nonconvex optimization. On the
other hand, Gotoh and Uryasev (2013) study SVC formulations on the basis of
convex functionals and discuss what properties of the risk measure affect the
SVC formulation. Tsyurmasto et al. (2013) focus on the positive homogeneity of
risk measures.
A generalized risk functional of the form                          , where is
a nondecreasing convex function on , was first studied by Ben-Tal and
Teboulle (1986). This functional is named optimized certainty equivalent (OCE).
Note that OCE can be viewed as a generalization of CVaR, since CVaR is
equivalent to OCE when                        . Kanamori et al. (2013)
(unintentionally) apply OCE to SVC as an extension of -SVC. Gotoh and
Uryasev (2013) point out that the use of OCE-based SVC is related to the
Csiszár -divergence (Csiszár, 1967).
Rockafellar and Uryasev (2013) provide a systematic view of risk functionals,
named the risk quadrangle, within which a wide class of convex functionals
used in risk management, statistics, economic theory, and so on are shown to be
related to each other. Indeed, CVaR is associated with quantile regression
(Koenker and Bassett, 1978) within the quantile-based quadrangle.

References
Acerbi, C. (2002). Spectral measures of risk: a coherent representation of
subjective risk aversion. Journal of Banking and Finance, 26 1505–1518.
Artzner, P., Delbaen, F., Eber, J.M. and Heath, D. (1999). Coherent measures of
risk. Mathematical Finance, 9 (3) 203–228.
Bennett, K.P. and Bredensteiner, E.J. (2000). Duality and geometry in SVM
classifiers. Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning, 57–
64.
Ben-Tal, A. and El-Ghaoui, L. and Nemirovski, A. (2009). Robust optimization.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Ben-Tal, A. and Teboulle, M. (1986). Expected utility, penalty functions, and
duality in stochastic nonlinear programming. Management Science, 32, 1445–
1466.
Boser B.E., Guyon I.M. and Vapnik V.N. (1992). A training algorithm for
optimal margin classifiers. COLT, 144–152.
Chang, C.C. and Lin, C.J. (2001). Training support vector classifiers: theory
and algorithms. Neural Computation, 13 (9), 2119–2147.
Cortes, C. and Vapnik, V. (1995). Support-vector networks. Machine Learning,
20 273–297.
Crisp, D.J. and Burges, C.J.C. (2000). A geometric interpretation of -SVM
classifiers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 12 (ed. Solla,
S.A., Leen, T.K. and Müller, K.R.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 244–250.
Csiszár, I. (1967). Information-type measures of divergence of probability
distributions and indirect observations. Studia Scientiarum Mathematicarum
Hungarica, 2, 299–318.
DeMiguel, V., Garlappi, L., Nogales, F.J. and Uppal, R. (2009). A generalized
approach to portfolio optimization: improving performance by constraining
portfolio norms. Management Science, 55 (5) 798–812.
Drucker, H., Burges C.J.C., Kaufman L., Smola A. and Vapnik V. (1997).
Support vector regression machines. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 9. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 155–161.
El Karoui, N., Lim, A.E.B. and Vahn, G.Y. (2012). Performance-based
regularization in mean-CVaR portfolio optimization. arXiv:1111.2091v2.
Gotoh, J. and Takeda, A. (2012). Minimizing loss probability bounds for
portfolio selection. European Journal of Operational Research, 217 (2), 371–
380.
Gotoh, J. and Takeda, A. (2011). On the role of norm constraints in portfolio
selection. Computational Management Science, 8 (4), 323–353.
Gotoh, J. and Takeda, A. (2005). A linear classification model based on
conditional geometric score. Pacific Journal of Optimization, 1 (2), 277–296.
Gotoh, J., Takeda, A. and Yamamoto, R. (2014). Interaction between financial
risk measures and machine learning methods. Computational Management
Science, 11 (4), 365–402.
Gotoh, J. and Uryasev, S. (2013). Support vector machines based on convex risk
functionals and general norms. Research report #2013-3. Gainesville, FL:
University of Florida, Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering.
www.ise.ufl.edu/uryasev/publications
Hoerl, E. and Kennard, R.W. (1970). Ridge regression: biased estimation for
nonorthogonal problems. Technometrics, 12, 55–67.
Kanamori, T., Takeda, A and Suzuki, T. (2013). Conjugate relation between loss
functions and uncertainty sets in classification problems. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 14, 1461–1504.
Koenker, R. and Bassett, G. (1978). Regression quantiles. Econometrica, 46, 33–
50.
Lim, A.E.B., Shanthikumar, J.G. and Vahn, G.Y. (2011). Conditional value-at-
risk in portfolio optimization: coherent but fragile. Operations Research Letters,
39 (3), 163–171.
Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio selection. Journal of Finance, 7, 77–91.
Perez-Cruz, F., Weston, J., Hermann, D.J.L. and Schölkopf, B. (2003).
Extension of the -SVM range for classification. In Advances in learning
theory: methods, models and applications 190 (ed. Suykens, J.A.K., Horvath, G.,
Basu, S., Micchelli, C. and Vandewalle, J.). Amsterdam: IOS Press, 179–196.
Pflug, G.C. (2000). Some remarks on the value-at-risk and the conditional value-
at-risk. In Probabilistic constrained optimization: methodology and applications
(ed. Uryasev, S.). Berlin: Springer, 278–287.
Rockafellar, R.T. and Uryasev, S. (2000). Optimization of conditional value-at-
risk. The Journal of Risk, 2 (3), 21–41.
Rockafellar, R.T. and Uryasev, S. (2002). Conditional value-at-risk for general
loss distributions. Journal of Banking and Finance, 26 (7), 1443–1471.
Rockafellar, R.T. and Uryasev, S. (2013). The fundamental risk quadrangle in
risk management, optimization and statistical estimation. Surveys in Operations
Research and Management Science, 18 (1–2), 33–53.
Ruszczyński, A. and Shapiro, A. (2006). Optimization of convex risk functions.
Mathematics of Operations Research, 31 (3), 433–452.
Schölkopf, B. and Smola, A.J. (2002). Learning with kernels – support vector
machines, regularization, optimization, and beyond. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Schölkopf, B., Smola, A.J., Williamson, R.C. and Bartlett, P.L. (2000). New
support vector algorithms. Neural Computation, 12 (5), 1207–1245.
Takeda, A. and Sugiyama, M. (2008). -Support vector machine as conditional
value-at-risk minimization. In Proceedings of 25th Annual International
Conference on Machine Learning. New York: ACM Press, 1056–1063.
Tax, D.M.J. and Duin, R.P.W. (1999). Support vector domain description.
Pattern Recognition Letters, 20, 1191–1199.
Tibshirani, R. (1996). Optimal reinsertion: regression shrinkage and selection via
the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 58 (1), 267–288.
Tsyurmasto, P., Gotoh, J. and Uryasev, S. (2013). Support vector classification
with positive homogeneous risk functionals. Research report #2013-4.
Gainesville, FL: University of Florida, Department of Industrial and Systems
Engineering. www.ise.ufl.edu/uryasev/publications/
Uryasev, S. (2016). Regression models in risk management. Chapter 11 of Ali
N. Akansu, Sanjeev R. Kulkarni and Dmitry Malioutov ed. Financial Signal
Processing and Machine Learning. Wiley.
Vanderbei, R.J. (2014). Linear programming: foundations and extensions, 4th
ed. Berlin: Springer.
Vapnik, V.N. (1995). The nature of statistical learning theory. Berlin: Springer.
Wang, Y. (2012). Robust -support vector machine based on worst-case
conditional value-at-risk minimization. Optimization Methods and Software, 27
(6), 1025–1038.
Wang, L., Zhu, J. and Zou, H. (2006). The doubly regularized support vector
machine. Statistica Sinica, 16 (2), 589.
Xu, H., Caramanis, C. and Mannor, S. (2009). Robustness and regularization of
support vector machines. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 10, 1485–
1510.
Zabarankin, M. and Uryasev, S. (2013). Statistical decision problems: selected
concepts and portfolio safeguard case studies. Berlin: Springer.
Zhu, S. and Fukushima, M. (2009). Worst-case conditional value-at-risk with
application to robust portfolio management. Operations Research, 57 (5), 1155–
1168.
Zou, H. and Hastie, T. (2005). Regularization and variable selection via the
elastic net. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 67 (2), 301–320.
1 In SVM and other statistical learning contexts, the word loss takes on a specific
    meaning. However, in this chapter, we will use this word in a different and
    more general manner for the sake of consistency with risk measure theory.
2 A functional    is convex if for all
                                                      .
3 The minimizer is unique if and only if                        (i.e., there is no
    probability atom at           ).
4            is also considered to be the mean of the -tail distribution of .
    See Proposition 6 of Rockafellar and Uryasev (2002) for the details.
5 Since the random variable         and probability measure can be expressed as
     vectors                      and                , we denote          by
                  .
6 While the knapsack problem is formulated as a binary integer program
                                             , where           , the corresponding
     continuous knapsack problem (CKP) is formulated as an LP:
                                            . With a change of variables
                    , (10.6) can be rewritten into an LP with                      ,
     and          . Strictly speaking, (10.6) is not a CKP since , and thus , can
     be negative. However, the same greedy algorithm is applicable.
7 This procedure shows that the complexity of computing the CVaR of a loss is
     at most on the order of       . If is uniform (i.e.,        ), we can use the
     so-called selection algorithm whose complexity is on the order of .
8 CVaR is also law invariant (i.e., if the distribution functions of     and are
     identical,                           ) and co-monotonically additive (i.e.,
                                                  for any       satisfying
                                     for any          ). A coherent risk measure that
     has these two properties is called a spectral (or distortion) risk measure. See,
     for example, Acerbi (2002) for details.
9 The results hold true in a more general setting. See, for example, Rockafellar
     and Uryasev (2013) and Ruszczyński and Shapiro (2006) for more general
     statements.
10           is lower semicontinuous (l.s.c.), that is,
                                   for any and any sequence                  ,
     converging to .
11              is proper, that is,                for all , and                    for
     some      .
12 If              follows a multivariate normal distribution         , the portfolio
     return (i.e.,      ), follows a normal distribution             . With the loss
                   , the CVaR minimization reduces to a second-order cone
     program, that is,                        with
                                              (see formula (10.4)). This is equivalent
     to the so-called mean–variance criterion (Markowitz, 1952) for a specific
     trade-off parameter.
13 This type of investment strategy is called passive, while those seeking to beat

     the market average are called active.
14 More precisely, hinge loss is viewed as a special case of the convex upper

     bound,                          with        and         , of the 0–1 loss, as
     shown in Figure 10.2.
15 To make a contrast with (10.13), formulations of this type are sometimes

     referred to as soft-margin SVCs.
16 Strong duality also holds (i.e., the optimal values of (10.14) and (10.15)

     approach the same         ).
17    -SVC with          may result in a nontrivial solution, whereas -SVC with
                always results in the trivial solution. The computation of will
     be discussed in Section 10.4.
18 Perez-Cruz et al. (2003) propose an iterative algorithm for computing a

     solution. It goes as follows. First, for some satisfying               , define an
     LP by replacing            by            , and solve it. Then, use the obtained
     solution to update , and repeat this procedure until convergence.
19 This class of problems is sometimes referred to as one-class classification or,
     more broadly, unsupervised learning.
20 The function                                 is called Vapnik's -insensitive loss
     function.
21 Based on the discussion at the end of Section 10.1, the CVaR-constraint in

     (10.23) can be regarded as a convex conservative approximation of the
     chance constraint                    .
22 This equivalence holds in the sense that these models provide the same
     optimal decision functions                         for any , , and .
     Schölkopf et al. (2000) use the optimality condition to show the
     independence of the resulting classifiers of the parameter . On the other
     hand, Tsyurmasto et al. (2013) show equivalence only on the basis of
     functional properties of CVaR such as positive homogeneity and continuity.
23 In this case,          of E -SVC (10.26) can be relaxed to              , but the
     resulting optimization problem is still nonconvex.
24 Since the loss                    is positively homogeneous with respect to ,
     we can show that (10.19) is equivalent to
                                             and
     in the sense that all of them provide the same decision function, as in two-
     class -SVC.
25 For example, with             , the optimal is equal to the weighted average
     of              ; with             , it is equal to the median center of
                  ; with            , it is equal to the geometric median (or one-
     median) of               . When               or , the optimal is
     sometimes called the Fermat–Weber point.
26 Note that E  -SVC also has this property because this proposition only relies
     on the KKT condition.
27 Obviously, the difference between (10.36) and (10.37) is only in the objective,
     and in practice, (10.36) is easier to solve since a quadratic program is more
     stably solvable than a second-order cone program.
28            and          .
29 For example, the i.i.d. assumption is often violated. In such a situation, it may

     be better to choose a non-uniform reference probability.
30 The objective function of (10.42) is squared:

                                          .
31 A similar result for     -SVC is derived in Xu et al. (2009), in which a smaller
     perturbation set is used in place of .
32 Proposition 10.3 relies on the monotonicity and the translation invariance of
     CVaR, but we cannot say that the elastic net is underpinned by the same
     reasoning. Note that the risk functional of the elastic net satisfies neither of
     these properties. However, we can say that DrSVM of Wang et al. (2006),
     which is a -SVC with an elastic net-type regularizer, is underpinned by the
     reasoning in Xu et al. (2009).
Chapter 11
Regression Models in Risk Management
   Stan Uryasev
   University of Florida, USA

This chapter discusses theory and application of generalized linear regression
that minimizes a general error measure of regression residual subject to various
constraints on regression coefficients and includes least-squares linear
regression, median regression, quantile regression, mixed quantile regression,
and robust regression as special cases. General error measures are nonnegative
positively homogeneous convex functionals that generalize the notion of norm
and, in general, are asymmetric with respect to ups and downs of a random
variable, which allows one to treat gains and losses differently. Each
nondegenerate error measure yields the deviation measure projected from
and the statistic associated with . General deviation measures are also
nonnegative positively homogeneous convex functionals, which, in contrast to
error measures, are insensitive to a constant shift. They generalize the notion of
standard deviation, but are not required to be symmetric. General deviation
measures admit dual characterization in terms of risk envelopes, which is
instrumental in devising efficient optimization formulations for minimization of
deviation measures. The central theoretical result in generalized linear regression
is the error decomposition theorem stating that minimization of an error measure
of the regression residual can be decomposed into minimizing the projected
deviation measure of the residual without the intercept and into setting the
intercept to the statistic associated with the error measure. The value of this
theorem is that minimization of deviation measures admits dual formulation in
terms of risk envelopes and, as a result, yields efficient optimization
formulations. Application of generalized linear regression includes examples of
financial index tracking, sparse signal reconstruction, therapy treatment
planning, collateralized debt obligation, mutual fund return-based style
classification, and mortgage pipeline hedging. The examples also provide linear
program formulations of the corresponding regressions.
The chapter is organized as follows. The introduction discusses a general setup
of linear regression. Section 11.2 introduces general error and deviation
measures, whereas Section 11.3 introduces risk envelopes and risk identifiers.
Section 11.4 states the error decomposition theorem. Sections 11.5, 11.6, and
11.7 formulate least-squares linear regression, median regression, and quantile
regression, respectively, and present application of these regressions in financial
engineering and signal processing. Section 11.7 also formulates mixed quantile
regression as a generalization of quantile regression. Section 11.8 introduces
unbiased linear regression and risk acceptable linear regression with application
to financial index tracking. Section 11.9 discusses robust regression with
application to mortgage pipeline hedging.

11.1 Introduction
In statistics, regression analysis aims to find the best relationship between a
response random variable (regressant) and independent variables
(regressors) in the form:


based on     available simultaneous observations of       and (regression
data):          , ,            , where is the approximation error.
There are two main classes of regression: parametric and nonparametric. If the
function is determined by a finite set of parameters, regression is called
parametric; otherwise, it is called nonparametric. The class of parametric
regressions is further divided into linear and nonlinear. In linear regression, is
a linear function with respect to unknown parameters, whereas                 can be
involved nonlinearly (though, in some definitions, linear regression is assumed
to be linear with respect to          ; see, e.g., Hastie et al., 2008). Typically, in
linear regression, has the form

                                                                                  11.1

where         ,              , are unknown regression parameters with called
intercept or bias. (Estimates of              found from the regression data are
denoted by              , respectively.) In nonlinear regression, is a nonlinear
function of specified unknown parameters, which are usually found iteratively.
One of the main approaches for finding estimates of regression parameters is to
maximize the likelihood of the observations of              under the assumption
that the residuals                      ,         , are realizations of independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) random variables           with zero mean; see
van der Waerden 1957. For example, if              are i.i.d. and have the normal
distribution       , then the likelihood of observing           is given by




and its maximization simplifies to




which is called the least-squares method. With            in the form of (11.1),
this minimization problem yields a system of linear equations for estimates
        :

                                                                                  11.2

with                 , where               for            and                 .
Even if          are only uncorrelated (not necessarily independent) with zero
mean and same variance, the Gauss–Markov theorem states that the best linear
unbiased estimator (BLUE) of the form (11.1) is determined by least-squares
linear regression. If         are correlated and/or not identically distributed
random variables, then the least-squares regression may not be appropriate.
Statistical approximation theory takes a different perspective on regression:
when the response random variable is not understood completely and is better
to be treated as a function            of random variables             , the error
                is sought to minimize some loss function or error measure with
respect to unknown regression parameters; see Rockafellar et al. 2008. In this
approach, central to regression analysis is the choice of error measure that
should conform to risk preferences of an analyst. For example, if the problem is
to track a stock market index by a portfolio of selected financial instruments,
whose returns are random variables             , the analyst may penalize only
underperformance of the portfolio return                with respect to the index
return , so that symmetric measures like          are not appropriate.
This chapter pursues the statistical approximation approach to regression. It
focuses on a general theory of approximating an output random variable by a
linear combination of input random variables           :
with an arbitrary error measure    under additional constraints on regression
coefficients.

11.2 Error and Deviation Measures
Let            be a probability space of elementary events with the sigma-
algebra     over and with a probability measure on               . Random
variables are assumed to be measurable real-valued functions from
                     unless otherwise specified,1 and the relationships between
random variables and (e.g.,               and      ) are understood to hold in the
almost-sure sense (i.e.,              and             ), respectively. Also,
and        mean essential infimum and essential supremum of (i.e.,
and          ), respectively. Two important integral characteristics of a random
variable are its mean and variance, defined by



respectively, and      is called the standard deviation of . If          , then
     and        are well defined (bounded), which explains the choice of        .
Rockafellar et al. (2002, 2006a, 2008) introduced error measures as functionals
                   satisfying
   (E1) Nonnegativity:            , but        for      ; also,          for
   constants .
   (E2) Positive homogeneity:                  when       .
   (E3) Subadditivity:                        for all   and       .
   (E4) Lower semicontinuity: set                        is closed for all      .
For example,     norms        with     are error measures. However, error
measures are not required to be symmetric; that is, in general,         . An
example of an asymmetric error measure is given by

                                                                                11.3
Another one is the asymmetric mean absolute error:
                                                                                      11.4

where                    . For         ,      simplifies to          . Observe that for
     and         , (11.3) simplifies to     , whereas for           ,     , and
           , it reduces to (11.4).
An error measure is nondegenerate if there exists         such that
               for all . For example, (11.3) and (11.4) are both nondegenerate
error measures with              and                   , respectively; see
Rockafellar et al. 2008.
Similar to error measures, Rockafellar et al. (2002, 2006a) introduced deviation
measures as functionals                    satisfying
   (D1) Nonnegativity:                for constant     , but           otherwise.
   (D2) Positive homogeneity:                        when       .
   (D3) Subadditivity:                               for all   and    .
   (D4) Lower semicontinuity: set                              is closed for all          .
It follows from D1 and D3 that


which is known as insensitivity to constant shift (see Rockafellar et al., 2006a).
Axioms D1–D4 generalize well-known properties of the standard deviation;
however, they do not imply symmetry, so that in general,                  .
Each error measure      yields a deviation measure through penalties relative to
expectation

                                                                                      11.5
and if is nondegenerate, it furnishes another deviation through error
projection

                                                                                      11.6
which is called the deviation of projected from ; see Theorem 2.1 in
Rockafellar et al. 2008. A solution to (11.6) is the statistic of associated with


                                                                                      11.7
which, in general, is an interval               of constants with
                         and                         , and has the following
properties:




Well-known examples of the relationships (11.6) and (11.7) are given in the
following table:




where          is the median of     (possibly an interval),


are lower and upper -quantiles, respectively, and              is conditional value
at risk (CVaR) deviation defined by

                                                                               11.8

Observe that for             , deviations (11.5) and (11.6) coincide, whereas for
           , they are different.
For a given deviation measure , a nondegenerate error measure can be obtained
by inverse projection


which through (11.6) projects back to with the associated statistic                 ;
see Rockafellar et al. (2008, Example 2.5).
If          are nondegenerate error measures that project to deviations
, respectively, then, for any weights               with             ,
is a nondegenerate error measure, which projects to the deviation measure




with the associated statistic




See Theorem 2.2 in Rockafellar et al. 2008. As an immediate consequence of
this result, we restate Example 2.6 from Rockafellar et al. 2008.


  Example 11.1 (mixed quantiles and mixed-
  CVaR deviation)
  For any choice of probability thresholds          and weights
                 with             ,

                                                                            11.9



  is a nondegenerate error measure called mixed quantile error measure,
  which projects to the mixed CVaR deviation

                                                                           11.10

  with the associated statistic

                                                                           11.11



11.3 Risk Envelopes and Risk Identifiers
Deviation measures have dual characterization in terms of risk envelopes
           defined by the following properties:
   (Q1)      is nonempty, closed, and convex;
   (Q2) for every nonconstant        , there is some        such that                ;
   and
   (Q3)            for all       .
There is a one-to-one correspondence between deviation measures and risk
envelopes (Rockafellar et al. 2006a, Theorem 1):

                                                                                  11.12


The elements of at which             attains infimum for a given        are called risk
identifiers for :



They are those elements of     that track the downside of      as closely as
possible.
The second relationship in (11.12) implies that the set of risk identifiers for
with respect to a deviation measure is determined by


From the optimization perspective,   is closely related to subdifferential
      of a deviation measure at , which is the set of subgradients
such that


Proposition 1 in Rockafellar et al. 2006b shows that



11.3.1 Examples of Deviation Measures , Corresponding
Risk Envelopes , and Sets of Risk Identifiers
   1. standard deviation                               :
      2. standard lower semideviation                                  :




      where
      3. mean absolute deviation                                 :




      4. lower worst-case deviation                          :




      5. CVaR deviation                      :

                                                                            11.13
      and           is the set of elements       such that           and

                                                                            11.14



If             are deviation measures, then

                                                                            11.15

and

                                                                            11.16
are deviation measures as well, for which the risk envelopes are given by
Proposition 4 in Rockafellar et al. 2006a:
where             are the risk envelopes for the deviation measures           .
This result and the formula (11.13) imply that the risk envelope for the mixed
CVaR deviation (11.10) is determined by

                                                                              11.17

Risk identifiers along with risk envelopes are instrumental in formulating
optimality conditions and devising optimization procedures in applications
involving deviation measures. For example, if is discretely distributed with
              ,           , then with the risk envelope representation (11.13), the
CVaR deviation (11.8) is readily restated as a linear program




whereas for the same    , mixed CVaR deviation (11.10) with (11.17) can be
represented by




11.4 Error Decomposition in Regression
An unconstrained generalized linear regression problem is formulated as
follows: approximate a random variable             by a linear combination
             of given random variables            ,            , and minimize an
error measure of the error                        with respect to              ,
where is assumed to be nondegenerate and finite everywhere on            , or,
formally,

                                                                              11.18

Observe that because of possible asymmetry of ,                  .
Well-known particular cases of the linear regression (11.18) include:
   1. Least-squares linear regression with                 ;
   2. Median regression with                   ; and
   3. Quantile regression with the asymmetric mean absolute error



   where                    and           .
The choice of error measure to be used in a given regression problem is
determined by the particular application and risk preferences of a decision
maker.
Theorem 3.2 in Rockafellar et al. 2008 shows that the generalized linear
regression (11.18) can be decomposed into minimizing the projected deviation
measure of                 with respect to      and into setting the intercept
to the associated statistic of optimal          . In other words, (11.18) is
reduced to

                                                                                  11.19

where                     is the deviation projected from , and
                      is the statistic associated with ; see Rockafellar et al.
2008. This result is known as error decomposition.
Furthermore, Theorem 4.1 in Rockafellar et al. 2008 states that               is a
solution to (11.19) if and only if

                                                                                  11.20
where        is the risk identifier for       with respect to deviation measure      ; see
Rockafellar et al. 2008.
In many applications (e.g., factor models, index tracking, and replication
problems), the coefficients              are often required to satisfy additional
constraints. Let be a feasible set of         dimensional vector                  .
For example, the requirement of                to be nonnegative translates into
having                      . In this case, the generalized linear regression takes
the form
                                                                                  11.21


Sections 11.5, 11.6, and 11.7 discuss the problem (11.21) with different error
measures and feasible sets frequently arising in various statistical decision
applications.

11.5 Least-Squares Linear Regression
A least-squares linear regression is one of the basic and most widely used
statistical tools that finds its applications in virtually all areas of science dealing
with data analysis and statistics (e.g., physics, biology, medicine, finance, and
economics).
Unconstrained least-squares linear regression is a particular case of (11.18) with
         and is given by

                                                                                  11.22


The first-order necessary optimality conditions for the optimization problem
(11.22) yield a system of linear equations for           :

                                                                                  11.23



If the covariance matrix of             is nonsingular, then the system can be
solved either numerically or in a closed form through the inverse



This is the main advantage of the least-squares linear regression.
The system (11.23) shows that the least-squares linear regression is solved in
two steps: finding        and then determining . In fact, for          , the error
decomposition formulation (11.19) takes the form
which states that the least-squares linear regression is equivalent to minimizing
variance of                with respect to          and then setting intercept to
the mean of               . This fact is often taken for granted and may create the
impression that the linear regression with another error measure also leads to
   being                 . However, this is possible only if the deviation
projected from coincides with the deviation from the penalties relative to
expectation; see Rockafellar et al. 2008.
With the risk identifier corresponding to the standard deviation, that is,




the optimality conditions (11.20) can be recast in the form




which with                        are equivalent to the system (11.23).
In contrast to (11.2), the system (11.23) yields “true”            (not estimates)
provided that the expected values        and        and the covariances
and            are known. However, in real-life problems, this is almost never the
case: we are only given simultaneous observations of              and :            ,
  ,            , so that the expected values and covariances should be estimated
through the given data.
In applications, least-squares linear regression is often solved subject to
additional constraints on regression coefficients and, in general, can be
formulated by

                                                                              11.24


where is some feasible set of                  . This problem admits a closed-form
solution only in a few simple cases, for example when is determined by a set
of linear equalities. In a general case, (11.24) is solved numerically.


  Example 11.2 (index tracking with mean
  square error)
  Let be the daily rate of return of a stock market index (e.g., S&P 500 and
  Nasdaq), and let          be the daily rates of return of chosen financial
  instruments. Suppose a unit capital is to be allocated among these
  instruments with capital weights           to replicate the index's rate of
  return by a linear combination of            without shorting of the
  instruments. The imposed requirements on              correspond to the
  feasible set

                                                                           11.25


  In this case, optimal allocation positions        can be found through the
  least-squares linear regression (11.24) with      and given by (11.25),
  which is a quadratic optimization problem.

Another application of constrained least-squares linear regression is sparse
signal reconstruction, whose objective is to find a decision vector that has few
nonzero components and satisfies certain linear constraints. The SPARCO
toolbox offers a wide range of test problems for benchmarking of algorithms for
sparse signal reconstruction; see http://www.cs.ubc.ca/labs/scl/sparco/.
Typically, SPARCO toolbox problems are formulated in one of three closely
related forms: L1Relaxed, L1Relaxed D, and L2 D (or LASSO). Both
“L1Relaxed” and “L1Relaxed D” formulations minimize the -error of the
regression residual subject to box constraints on decision variables and subject to
a constraint on the -norm of the decision vector.2 The difference in these two
formulations is that “L1Relaxed D” splits each decision variable into two
nonnegative variables                     and                  (           and
             ) and, as a result, has all decision variables nonnegative. Since
“L1Relaxed D” doubles the number of the decision variables, in some problems,
it may be less efficient than “L1Relaxed.” The “L2 D” formulation minimizes
the weighted sum of the squared -norm of the regression residual and the -
norm of the vector of regression coefficients subject to box constraints on the
coefficients. As the “L1Relaxed D” formulation, this one also splits each
regression coefficient into two nonnegative parts.


  Example 11.3 (sparse reconstruction problem
  from the SPARCO toolbox)
  from the SPARCO toolbox)
  Let         be an error function that linearly depends on a decision vector
                and on a given random vector                   . The “L2 D”
  formulation of the sparse reconstruction problem from the SPARCO toolbox
  is a regression that minimizes a linear combination of             and the
  regularization part           subject to box constraints          ,         ,
  where and are given bounds with                 and      . Let
  with                   , then             and             , and the “L2 D”
  formulation takes the form

                                                                           11.26



  where    is a given parameter.

Constrained least-squares linear regression is also used in an intensity-modulated
radiation therapy (IMRT) treatment-planning problem formulated in Men et al.
2008. To penalize underdosing and overdosing with respect to a given threshold,
the problem uses quadratic one-sided penalties or, equivalently, second-order
lower and upper partial moments.


  Example 11.4 (therapy treatment planning
  problem)
  Let                           be a loss function, where        linearly
  depends on a decision vector                 and on a given random vector
                 . The regression problem, arising in intensity-modulated
  radiation therapy treatment, minimizes               subject to box constraints
             with given bounds and :

                                                                           11.27


11.6 Median Regression
In the least-squares linear regression, large values of the error
                       are penalized heavier than small values, which makes the
regression coefficients quite sensitive to outliers. In applications that require
equal treatment of small and large errors, the median regression can be used
instead.
Unconstrained median regression is a particular case of (11.18) with                :

                                                                             11.28


for which the error decomposition formulation (11.19) takes the form

                                                                             11.29

where        is the median of , which, in general, is any number in the closed
interval                . Observe that the median regression does not reduce to
minimization of the mean-absolute deviation (MAD) and that is not the mean
of             .
Let          be an optimal solution to the problem (11.29), and let the random
variable                    have no probability “atom” at         ; then, the
interval        is a singleton, and the optimality conditions (11.20) reduce to



These conditions are, however, rarely used in practice.
In applications,            and are often assumed to be discretely distributed
with joint probability distribution                                  ,
, with           . In this case,




and the median regression (11.28) reduces to the linear program
                                                                                  11.30




where           are auxiliary variables.
The median regression with constraints on regression coefficients is formulated
by

                                                                                  11.31


where is a given feasible set of               . For an arbitrary joint
probabilitydistribution of          and , the necessary optimality conditions
for (11.31) are given in Rockafellar et al. 2006a.
If          and are discretely distributed, and is determined by a set of
linear constraints, the Equation (11.31) reduces to a linear program.


  Example 11.5 (index tracking with mean
  absolute error)
  The setting is identical to that in Example 11.2. But this time, the optimal
  allocation positions           are found through the median regression
  (11.31) with given by (11.25). If              and are assumed to be
  discretely distributed with joint probability distribution               ,
                         ,             , where           , then this regression
  problem can be formulated as the linear program
  where            are auxiliary variables.

Constrained median regression is also used to design a portfolio of credit default
swaps (CDS) and credit indices to hedge against changes in a collateralized debt
obligation (CDO) book. A CDS provides insurance against the risk of default
(credit event) of a particular company. A buyer of the CDS has the right to sell
bonds issued by the company for their face value when the company is in
default. The buyer makes periodic payments to the seller until the end of the life
of the CDS or until a default occurs. The total amount paid per year, as a
percentage of the notional principal, is known as the CDS spread, which is
tracked by credit indices. A CDO is a credit derivative based on defaults of a
pool of assets. Its common structure involves tranching or slicing the credit risk
of the reference pool into different risk levels of increasing seniority. The losses
first affect the equity (first loss) tranche, then the mezzanine tranche, and finally
the senior and super senior tranches. The hedging problem is to minimize risk of
portfolio losses subject to budget and cardinality constraints on hedge positions.
The risk is measured by mean absolute deviation (MAD) and by -norm (mean
absolute penalty).


  Example 11.6 (median regression and CDO)
  Let       be a loss function in hedging against changes in a collateralized
  debt obligation (CDO) book, where            linearly depends on a decision
  vector               (positions in financial instruments) and on a given
  random vector                 . A regression problem then minimizes the
  mean absolute error of         subject to the budget constraint
  with given and          ,           , and subject to a constraint on cardinality
  of the decision variables not to exceed a positive integer :

                                                                             11.32




  where is a given threshold;         is the indicator function equal to 1 if the
  condition in the curly brackets is true, and equal to 0 otherwise; and          ,
            , are bounds on decision variables (positions).

The next three examples formulate regression problems arising in sparse signal
reconstruction. In all of them,        is an error function that linearly depends on
a decision vector                and on a given random vector                  , and
          ,            , are box constraints with given bounds and (             ).


  Example 11.7 (sparse signal reconstruction I:
  “L1Relaxed” formulation)
  This regression problem minimizes the mean absolute error of      subject
  to a constraint on cardinality of with given integer bound and subject to
  box constraints on :

                                                                             11.33




  Example 11.8 (sparse signal reconstruction II)
  This regression problem minimizes the mean absolute error of             subject
 to a constraint on the -norm of , that is,                 with given bound
 , and subject to box constraints on :

                                                                           11.34




 Example 11.9 (sparse signal reconstruction III)
 This estimation problems minimizes the cardinality of subject to
 constraints on the mean absolute error of     and on the -norm of
 with given bounds and , respectively, and subject to box constraints on
   :

                                                                           11.35




Example 11.10 presents a reformulation of the regression problem (11.34).


 Example 11.10 (sparse signal reconstruction
 from SPARCO toolbox)
 Suppose the random vector is discretely distributed and takes on values
        ,      with corresponding positive probabilities            summing
 into 1, so that                            . Let                 ,           ,
 then             and             . Given that          is linear with respect to
    and that        and      ,          , the problem (11.34) can be restated
 as the linear program
                                                                           11.36




  where           are auxiliary variables.


11.7 Quantile Regression and Mixed Quantile
Regression
Both the least-squares linear regression and median regression treat ups and
downs of the regression error equally, which might not be desirable in some
applications. For example, in the index tracking problem from Example 11.2, a
decision maker (financial analyst) may use a quantile regression that minimizes
the asymmetric mean absolute error                                of
                     for some           .
Unconstrained quantile regression is a particular case of the generalized linear
regression (11.18) with the asymmetric mean absolute error measure:

                                                                             11.37

where                  ; and the multiplier     in the objective function is
omitted. Observe that for        , (11.37) is equivalent to the median regression
(11.28).
In this case, the error decomposition formulation (11.19) takes the form

                                                                             11.38

In other words, the quantile regression (11.37) reduces to minimizing CVaR
deviation of               with respect to         and to setting to any value
from the -quantile interval of               .
Let          be an optimal solution to the problem (11.38), and let the random
variable                   have no probability “atom” at       , then the interval
             is a singleton, and the optimality conditions (11.20) simplify to



However, in this form, they are rarely used in practice.
If           and are discretely distributed with joint probability distribution
              ,                     ,           , where            , then with the
formula (5) in Rockafellar et al. 2006a, the quantile regression (11.37) can be
restated as the linear program

                                                                              11.39




where           are auxiliary variables.
The return-based style classification for a mutual fund is a regression of the fund
return on several indices as explanatory variables, where regression coefficients
represent the fund's style with respect to each of the indices. In contrast to the
least-squares regression, the quantile regression can assess the impact of
explanatory variables on various parts of the regressand distribution, for example
on the 95th and 99th percentiles. Moreover, for a portfolio with exposure to
derivatives, the mean and quantiles of the portfolio return distribution may have
quite different regression coefficients for the same explanatory variables. For
example, in most cases, the strategy of investing into naked deep out-of-the-
money options behaves like a bond paying some interest; however, in some rare
cases, this strategy may lose significant amounts of money. With the quantile
regression, a fund manager can analyze the impact of a particular factor on any
part of the return distribution. Example 11.11 presents an unconstrained quantile
regression problem arising in the return-based style classification of a mutual
fund.


     Example 11.11 (quantile regression in style
  Example 11.11 (quantile regression in style
  classification)
  Let         be a loss function that linearly depends on a decision vector
                 and on a random vector                  representing uncertain
  rates of return of indices as explanatory variables. The quantile regression
  (11.37) with          in place of takes the form

                                                                            11.40

A constrained quantile regression is formulated similarly to (11.37):

                                                                             11.41



where    is a given feasible set for regression coefficients            .


  Example 11.12 (index tracking with
  asymmetric mean absolute error)
  The setting is identical to that in Example 11.2. But this time, the allocation
  positions          are found from the constrained quantile regression (11.41)
  with given by (11.25). If               and are assumed to be discretely
  distributed with joint probability distribution              ,
                         ,             , where         , then this regression
  problem can be formulated as the linear program
  where              are auxiliary variables.

The linear regression with the mixed quantile error measure (11.9) is called
mixed quantile regression. It generalizes quantile regression and, through error
decomoposition, takes the form

                                                                               11.42



with the intercept     determined by




where           are a solution to (11.42); see Example 3.1 in Rockafellar et al.
2008.
The optimality conditions (11.20) for (11.42) are complicated. However, as the
quantile regression, (11.42) can be reduced to a linear program.

11.8 Special Types of Linear Regression
This section discusses special types of unconstrained and constrained linear
regressions encountered in statistical decision problems.
Often, it is required to find an unbiased linear approximation of an output
random variable by a linear combination of input random variables                   ,
in which case the approximation error has zero expected value:
                         . A classical example of an unbiased linear regression is
minimizing variance or, equivalently, standard deviation with the intercept set
to                      . If, in this example, the standard deviation is replaced by
a general deviation measure , we obtain a generalized unbiased linear
regression:

                                                                               11.43

In fact, (11.43) is equivalent to minimizing the error measure
of                       . Observe that in view of the error decomposition
theorem (Rockafellar et al., 2008, Theorem 3.2), the generalized linear
regression (11.18) with a nondegenerate error measure and the unbiased linear
regression (11.43) with the deviation measure projected from yield the same
         but, in general, different intercepts .
Rockafellar et al. 2008 introduced risk acceptable linear regression in which a
deviation measure of the approximation error                           is
minimized subject to a constraint on the averse measure of risk related to
by                    :

                                                                           11.44

which is equivalent to

                                                                           11.45

The unbiased linear regression (11.43) and risk acceptable linear regression
(11.45) show that the intercept could be set based on different requirements.
In general, the risk acceptable regression may minimize either an error measure
   or a deviation measure of the error subject to a constraint on a risk
measure of not necessarily related to or . Example 11.13 illustrates a
risk acceptable regression arising in a portfolio replication problem with a
constraint on CVaR.


  Example 11.13 (risk acceptable regression)
  Let        be a portfolio replication error (loss function) that linearly
  depends on a decision vector                  and on a random vector
                  representing uncertain rates of return of instruments in a
  portfolio replicating the S&P 100 index. The risk acceptable regression
  minimizes the mean absolute error of               subject to the budget
  constraint               with known             and and subject to a CVaR
  constraint on the underperformance of the portfolio compared to the index:
                                                                          11.46




  where    and    are given.


11.9 Robust Regression
Robust regression aims to reduce influence of sample outliers on regression
parameters, especially when regression error has heavy tails.
In statistics, robustness of an estimator is a well-established notion and is
assessed by the so-called estimator's breakdown point, which is the proportion of
additional arbitrarily large observations (outliers) needed to make the estimator
unbounded. For example, the sample mean requires just a single such
observation, while the sample median would still be finite until the proportion of
such observations reaches 50%. Consequently, the mean's breakdown point is
0%, whereas the median's breakdown point is 50%.
As in the previous regression setting, suppose is approximated by a linear
combination of input random variables             with the regression error
defined by                      , where            are unknown regression
coefficients. A robust regression minimizes an error measure of that has a
nonzero breakdown point. Thus, in this setting, the regression's breakdown point
is that of the error measure.
Often, a robust regression relies on order statistics of and on “trimmed” error
measures. Two popular robust regressions are the least median of squares (LMS)
regression, which minimizes the median of and has a 50% breakdown point:

                                                                            11.47

and the least-trimmed-squares (LTS) regression, which minimizes the average
-quantile of and has a         100% breakdown point:
                                                                             11.48

Rousseeuw and Driessen 2006 referred to (11.48) as a challenging optimization
problem.
Typically, in the LTS regression, is set to be slightly larger than      . For
,              , and (11.48) reduces to the standard least-squares regression. The
LTS regression is reported to have advantages over the LMS regression or the
one that minimizes the -quantile of ; see Rousseeuw and Driessen 2006,
Rousseeuw and Leroy 1987, and Venables and Ripley 2002.
Let be such that          for      and       , but not necessarily symmetric
(i.e.,         in general). Then, the LMS and LTS regressions have the
following generalization:
   1. Minimizing the upper     -quantile of    :

                                                                             11.49

   2. Minimizing the average -quantile of          :

                                                                             11.50

For example, in both (11.49) and (11.50), we may use            ,   . In
particular, for        , (11.49) with       corresponds to the LMS regression
(11.47), whereas (11.50) reduces to the LTS regression (11.48).
When             , (11.49) and (11.50) do not discriminate positive and negative
errors. This, however, is unlikely to be appropriate for errors with significantly
skewed distributions. For example, instead of            and       , we can use
two-tailed -value-at-risk (VaR) deviation of the error defined by

                                                                             11.51


The definition (11.51) shows that the two-tailed -VaR deviation is, in fact, the
range between the upper and lower         -tails of the error , which is
equivalent to the support of the random variable with truncated          100%
of the “outperformances” and          100% of “underperformances.”
Consequently, the two-tailed -VaR deviation has the breakdown point of
      100%. Typically, is chosen to be 0.75 and 0.9.
Robust regression is used in mortgage pipeline hedging. Usually, mortgage
lenders sell mortgages in the secondary market. Alternatively, they can exchange
mortgages for mortgage-backed securities (MBSs) and then sell MBSs in the
secondary market. The mortgage-underwriting process is known as the
“pipeline.” Mortgage lenders commit to a mortgage interest rate while the loan is
in process, typically for a period of 30–60 days. If the rate rises before the loan
goes to closing, the value of the loan declines and the lender sells the loan at a
lower price. The risk that mortgages in process will fall in value prior to their
sale is known as mortgage pipeline risk. Lenders often hedge this exposure
either by selling forward their expected closing volume or by shorting either US
Treasury notes or futures contracts. Fallout refers to the percentage of loan
commitments that do not go to closing. It affects the mortgage pipeline risk. As
interest rates fall, the fallout rises because borrowers locked in a mortgage rate
are more likely to find better rates with another lender. Conversely, as rates rise,
the percentage of loans that close increases. So, the fallout alters the size of the
pipeline position to be hedged against and, as a result, affects the required size of
the hedging instrument: at lower rates, fewer rate loans will close and a smaller
position in the hedging instrument is needed. To hedge against the fallout risk,
lenders often use options on US Treasury note futures.
Suppose a hedging portfolio is formed out of hedging instruments with
random returns            . A pipeline risk hedging problem is to minimize a
deviation measure of the underperformance of the hedging portfolio with
respect to a random hedging target , where short sales are allowed and
transaction costs are ignored. Example 11.14 formulates a robust regression with
the two-tailed -VaR deviation used in a mortgage pipeline hedging problem.


  Example 11.14 (robust regression with two-
  tailed -VaR deviation)
  Let a target random variable be approximated by a linear combination of
     random variables         , then the robust regression minimizes the two-
  tailed -VaR deviation of the error                  :
                                                                         11.52


  It has a      100%-breakdown point.


References, Further Reading, and Bibliography
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R. and Friedman, J. (2008). The elements of statistical
learning: data mining, inference, and prediction, 2nd ed. New York: Springer.
Koenker, R. and Bassett, G. (1978). Regression quantiles. Econometrica, 46, 33–
50.
Men, C., Romeijn, E., Taskin, C. and Dempsey, J. (2008). An exact approach to
direct aperture optimization in IMRT treatment planning. Physics in Medicine
and Biology, 52, 7333–7352.
Rockafellar, R.T., Uryasev, S. and Zabarankin, M. (2002). Deviation measures
in risk analysis and optimization. Technical Report 2002-7, ISE Department,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
Rockafellar, R.T., Uryasev, S. and Zabarankin, M. (2006a). Generalized
deviations in risk analysis. Finance and Stochastics, 10, 51–74.
Rockafellar, R.T., Uryasev, S. and Zabarankin, M. (2006b). Optimality
conditions in portfolio analysis with general deviation measures. Mathematical
Programming, Series B, 108, 515–540.
Rockafellar, R.T., Uryasev, S. and Zabarankin, M. (2008). Risk tuning with
generalized linear regression. Mathematics of Operations Research, 33, 712–
729.
Rousseeuw, P.J. and Driessen, K. (2006). Computing LTS regression for large
data sets. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 12, 29–45.
Rousseeuw, P. and Leroy, A. (1987). Robust regression and outlier detection.
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
van der Waerden, B. (1957). Mathematische Statistik. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Venables, W. and Ripley, B. (2002). Modern applied statistics with S-PLUS, 4th
ed. New York: Springer.
1      is the Lebesgue space of measurable square-integrable functions on   :
             is equivalent to                 .
2   -norm of a vector is the sum of absolute values of vector components.
Index
  References to figures are given in bold type. References to tables are given
  in italic type.
  ACF see autocorrelation functions
  adaptive lasso
  anti-monotone sets
  AR(1) process
     Eigen subspace
     KLT kernel derivation
     orthogonal subspace
         Karhunen-Loeve transform
         performance matrices
     power spectral density
     stochastic signal model
  arbitrage
  ARCH model
     nonparametric tests
     parametric tests
  Archimedean copula
  assets, mean-reverting
  autocorrelation functions (ACF)
     Kendall's tau
     misspecification testing
         conditional heteroscedascicity
         Ljung-Box
     Spearman's rho
autocovariance
autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity (ARCH)
backward simulation (BS)
BEKK Garch model
bias
BIC criterion
bid-ask price
big data finance
Black-Scholes model
BS method
capital market line
causal strength modeling
causal strength modeling (CSM)
CDVine
CLIME
co-monotone sets
coherent risk measure
cointegration-based trading strategies
collateralized debt obligation (CDO)
conditional sparsity
conditional value at risk (CVaR)
   minimization
       support vector machines
conditional value at risk (CVaR)
   portfolio selection
   as risk measure
   robust optimization
   under finite scenarios
    under finite scenarios
    under normal distribution
constant relative risk aversion (CRRA)
constant shift insensitivity
contract asymptotics
convex relaxation
copula modeling
    Archimedean
    multiple variables
    parametric
    product copula
    software
copula (software)
correlation measures
    copulas
        fitting
    dependence types
        positive and negative
        tail
    Granger causality
    Huber-type
    Kendall's tau
    misspecification testing
        ARCH effects
        Ljung-Box
        multivariate
    multiple variables
    Spearman's rho
    Spearman's rho
covariance matrix estimation
    factor analysis
        asymptotic results
        example
        threshold
        unknown factors
    pure factor models
        optimal weight matrix
covariance selection
credit default swaps
CRSP database
CVar see conditional value at risk
Dantzig selector
dependence
deviation
Dirichlet distribution
discrete cosine transform (DCT)
discrete Fourier transform (DFT)
domain description
dynamic programming equation
efficient frontier
efficient market hypothesis (EMH)
Eigen decomposition see principal components analysis
EJD algorithm
error decomposition
error measures
error projection
essential infimum
essential supremum
estimator's breakdown point
ETF see exchange-traded funds
Ev-SVC
exchange-traded funds
expectation-maximization
expected shortfall
extreme joint distribution (EJD) algorithm
factor analysis
    covariance matrix estimation
          asymptotic results
          threshold
          unknown factors
factor-pricing model
fallout
Fama-French model
fixed income instruments
fixed strike price
fixed transforms
Frank copula
Frechet-Hoeffding theorem
Fused-DBN
GARCH model
    BEKK GARCH model
    VECH GARCH
Gauss-Markov theorem
Gaussian copula
Gaussian copula
genomic networks
GICS
Global Financial Crisis
Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS)
global minimum variance portfolio
Granger causality
    nonlinear
graphical Dantzig selector
Green's function
group lasso
group OMP
H-J test
high-density region estimation
high-frequency trading
hinge loss
Huber-type correlations
implied volatility asymptotics
implied volatility skew
index tracking
inference function for margins (IFM) method
intensity randomization
intercept
interior point (IP)
interior point (IP method)
inverse projection
investment risk
iShares
iShares
Japan
jump-diffusion processes
Karhunen-Loeve transform (KLT)
   kernel derivation
          continuous process with exponential autocorrelation
          eigenanalysis of discrete AR(1) process
          fast derivation
   NASDAQ-100 index
   subspace sparsity
          pdf-optimized midtread reader
   see also principal components analysis
Karhunen-Loeve expansion
Kendall's tau
kernel trick
Kolmogorov backward equation (KBE)
Landweber's iteration
lasso regression
   adaptive
   group
   SQRT
least absolute deviation (LAD)
least median of squares (LMS) regression
least-squares methods
   ordinary least squares
   POET and
   regularized
   temporal causal modeling
least-trimmed-squares (LTS) regression
leverage effect
Lévy kernel
linear regression
liquidity
Ljung-Box test
local volatility models
local-stochastic volatility (LSV) models
   Heston
   Lévy-type
market incompleteness
market microstructure
market price of risk
market risk see investment risk
Markov-switched TCM
Markowitz bullet
Markowitz portfolio selection
   elastic net strategy
   as inverse problem
   portfolio description
   as regression problem
   sparse
Markowitz portfolio selection continued
empirical validation
optimal forecast combination
portfolio rebalancing
portfolio replication
see also sparse Markowitz portfolios
matrix deflation
maximum a posteriori (MAP) modeling
mean-absolute deviation
mean-reverting portfolios
   crossing statistics
   mean-reversion proxies
   numerical experiments
       basket estimators
       historical data
       Jurek and Yang strategy
       Sharpe ratio robustness
       tradeoffs
       transaction costs
   optimal baskets
   portmanteau criterion
   predictability
       multivariate case
       univariate case
   semidefinite relaxations
       portmanteau
       predictability
   volatility and sparsity
mean-variance efficiency
Merton problem
mevalonate (MVA) pathway
misspecification testing
   ARCH/GARCH
   ARCH/GARCH
   Ljung-Box test
   multivariate
model asymptotics
monotone distributions
mortgage pipeline risk
MSCI Japan Index
NASDAQ-100
negative dependence
news analysis
Newton method
no-arbitrage pricing
no-short portfolios
nonnegative space PCA
nonnegative sparse PCA
optimal order execution
optimized certainty equivalent (OCE)
option pricing
   asymptotic expansions
       contract
       implied volatility
       model
       model coefficient expansions
       model tractability
Oracle property
ordinary least square (OLS)
Ornstein–Uhlenbeck (OU) process
orthogonal patching pursuit (OMP)
orthogonal patching pursuit (OMP)
outlier detection
panel data models
partial integro-differential equation (PIDE)
Pearson correlation coefficient
penalized matrix decomposition
penalties relative to expectation
pension funds
perturbation theory
POET
Poisson processes
   backward simulation (BS)
   common shock model
   extreme joint distributions
       approximation
       Frechet-Hoeffding theorem
       monotone
       optimization problem
   intensity randomization
   numerical results
   simulation
       backward
       forward
       model calibration
Poisson random vectors
Poisson-Wiener process
portfolio manager
portfolio optimization
   1=N puzzle
   Markowitz
portfolio rebalancing
portfolio risk estimation
positive dependence
positive homogeneity
power enhancement test
precision matrix estimation
   applications
   column-wise
   portfolio risk assessment
   TIGER
       application
       computation
       genomic network application
       theoretical properties
   tuning-insensitive procedures
price inefficiency
principal components analysis (PCA)
principal orthogonal complement
principal orthogonal complement thresholding (POET) estimator
principal components analysis (PCA)
   discrete autoregressive (AR(1)) model
       fast kernel derivation
   Eigen subspace
   Eigen subspace sparsity
   KLT kernel
       continuous process with exponential autocorrelation
       continuous process with exponential autocorrelation
       eigenanalysis of a discrete AR(1) process
   orthogonal subspace
       Eigen subspace
       performance metrics
   pure factor models
   sparse methods
       AR(1)
       Eigen subspace quantization
       Eigenvector pdf
       pdf-optimized midtread quantizer
       performance
pulse code modulation (PCM)
pure factor model
Q-TCM
quadratic penalty
quantile regression
quantile TCM
quasi–Monte Carlo (QMC) algorithms
reduced convex hulls
regressant
regression analysis
   CVar-based
   error decomposition
   error and deviation measures
   lasso see lasso regression
   least-squares, regularized
   least-squares methods
   least-squares methods
   linear regression
   median regression
   ordinary least squares
   quantile regression
   risk envelopes and identifiers
   robust
   support vector regression
regressors
return on investment (ROI)
ridge regression
risk acceptable linear regression
risk envelopes
risk inference
risk pReferences
risk quadrangle
risk-neutrality
risk-normalized return
robust optimization, distributional
robust regression
SCoTLASS
SDP see semidefinite programs
SDP relaxations for sparse PCA (DSPCA)
securities
securities markets
semidefinite programs
   relaxation tightness
Sharpe ratio
    transaction costs and
Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury formula
shift operator
shortselling
signal-to-quantization-noise ratio (SQNR)
Sklar's theorem
soft convex hulls
soft thresholding
sparse KLT
sparse Markowitz portfolios
    empirical validation
    portfolio rebalancing
sparse modeling
sparse PCA via regularized SVD (sPCA–rSVD)
sparse vector autoregressive (VAR) models
Spearman's rho
SQRT-lasso
stationary sequences
statistical approximation theory
statistical arbitrage
stochastic volatility
    Black-Scholes model
    dynamic programmic equation
    implied volatility
    local volatility models
    Merton problem
    separation of timescales approach
    stochastic volatility models
   stochastic volatility models
       local (LSV)
       with jumps
   volatility modeling
   volatility of volatility
stock exchanges
stock return analysis
Strong Law of Large Numbers
support vector machines (SVM)
   classification
       C-support
   duality
   soft-margin
   v-SVM
       geometric interpretation
support vector regression (SVR)
Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF)
Switzerland
tail dependence
tail VaR
temporal causal modeling (TCM)
   algorithmi overview
   Bayesian group lasso
   extensions
       causal strength modeling
       quantile TCM
   Granger causality and
   grouped method
   grouped method
        greedy
        regularized least-squares
   Markov switching model
        stock return analysis
        synthetic experiments
   maximum a posteriori (MAP) modeling
   quantile TCM
   regime change identification
        algorithm
   synthetic experiments
        data generation
TIGER
   computation
Tikhonov regularization
time series
Tobin two-fund separation theorem
transcendental equations
transform coding
translation invariance
truncated singular value decomposition (TSVD)
tuning-insensitivity
TV-DBN
two-tailed [alpha]-value-at-risk (VaR) deviation
unbiased linear regression
v-property
v-SVM
v-SVR
value function
value-at-risk
Vapnik–Chervonenkis theory
VECH GARDCH model
vector autoregression (VAR)
    multivariate volatility
    temporal causal modeling
VineCopula
volatility
volatility of volatility modeling
Wald test
weighted principal components (WPC)
Yahoo! Finance
zero crossing rate
WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley's ebook EULA.
