The Raymond and Beverly Sackler Faculty of Exact Sciences
        The Blavatnik School of Computer Science




   Machine Learning Algorithms
    with Applications in Finance




  Thesis submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy
                            by
                       Eyal Gofer




    This work was carried out under the supervision of
              Professor Yishay Mansour




      Submitted to the Senate of Tel Aviv University
                       March 2014
        c 2014
Copyright by Eyal Gofer
  All Rights Reserved
To my parents
                                Acknowledgements

I have had the good fortune to work with extraordinary scientists during my stint as
a student at Tel Aviv University. First and foremost, I wish to thank my advisor,
Professor Yishay Mansour, for sharing his vast knowledge and experience, and for
setting such a clear example of excellence in research. I am also very grateful to
Professor Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi and to Professor Claudio Gentile, with whom I had the
honor and pleasure of collaborating, for providing that wonderful opportunity.
   These memorable years at Tel Aviv University have been made all the more pleasant
by the people at the school of computer science. In particular, I would like to thank my
fellow students Mariano Schain, Shai Vardi, and Shai Hertz, for their friendly company
throughout this time.
   Finally, to my dear family, many thanks for everything.
                                       Abstract

Online decision making and learning occur in a great variety of scenarios. The decisions
involved may consist of stock trading, ad placement, route planning, picking a heuris-
tic, or making a move in a game. Such scenarios vary also in the complexity of the
environment or the opponent, the available feedback, and the nature of possible deci-
sions. Remarkably, in the last few decades, the theory of online learning has produced
algorithms that can cope with this rich set of problems. These algorithms have two
very desirable properties. First, they make minimal and often worst-case assumptions
on the nature of the learning scenario, making them robust. Second, their success is
guaranteed to converge to that of the best strategy in a benchmark set, a property
referred to as regret minimization.
    This work deals both with the general theory of regret minimization, and with its
implications for pricing financial derivatives.
    One contribution to the theory of regret minimization is a trade-off result, which
shows that some of the most important regret minimization algorithms are also guar-
anteed to have non-negative and even positive levels of regret for any sequence of plays
by the environment. Another contribution provides improved regret minimization al-
gorithms for scenarios in which the benchmark set of strategies has a high level of
redundancy; these scenarios are captured in a model of dynamically branching strate-
gies.
    The contributions to derivative pricing build on a reduction from the problem of
pricing derivatives to the problem of bounding the regret of trading algorithms. They
comprise regret minimization-based price bounds for a variety of financial derivatives,
obtained both by means of existing algorithms and specially designed ones. Moreover,
a direct method for converting the performance guarantees of general-purpose regret
minimization algorithms into performance guarantees in a trading scenario is developed
and used to derive novel lower and upper bounds on derivative prices.
Contents

1 Introduction                                                                                1
    1.1   Arbitrage-Free Pricing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      3
          1.1.1   The Arbitrage-Free Assumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         3
          1.1.2   Regret Minimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       4
    1.2   Online Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     4
          1.2.1   Specific Settings of Online Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        5
    1.3   Competitive Analysis and Pricing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        6
    1.4   An Overview of Related Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         8
          1.4.1   Derivative Pricing in the Finance Literature . . . . . . . . . . . .        8
          1.4.2   Regret Minimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       9
          1.4.3   Robust Trading and Pricing in the Learning Literature . . . . . .          16
          1.4.4   Competitive Analysis and One-Way Trading           . . . . . . . . . . .   21
    1.5   Contributions in This Dissertation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       22
          1.5.1   Contributions to the Theory of Regret Minimization . . . . . . .           23
          1.5.2   Contributions to Derivative Pricing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      24
    1.6   Outline of This Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     26



I   Regret Minimization                                                                      29

2 Background and Model                                                                       31
    2.1   Regret Minimization Settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       31
    2.2   Convex Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     34
    2.3   Seminorms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      35

3 Lower Bounds on Individual Sequence Regret                                                 36
    3.1   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   36

                                              ix
     3.2   Non-negative Individual Sequence Regret . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           37
           3.2.1   Relation to Regularized Follow the Leader . . . . . . . . . . . . .         40
     3.3   Strictly Positive Individual Sequence Anytime Regret          . . . . . . . . . .   42
           3.3.1   Potentials with Negative Definite Hessians . . . . . . . . . . . . .        45
           3.3.2   The Best Expert Setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       46
     3.4   Application to Specific Regret Minimization Algorithms . . . . . . . . .            49
           3.4.1   Online Gradient Descent with Linear Costs . . . . . . . . . . . .           49
           3.4.2   The Hedge Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         50
     3.5   Appendix: Additional Claims and Missing Proofs . . . . . . . . . . . . .            53
           3.5.1   An Extension of the FTL-BTL Lemma             . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57

4 Regret Minimization for Branching Experts                                                    60
     4.1   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    60
     4.2   Branching Experts with Full Information         . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   62
     4.3   Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      64
     4.4   Adapting Hedge for the Branching Setup          . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   66
     4.5   Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    71
     4.6   Lower Bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      74
     4.7   Branching Experts for the Multi-Armed Bandit Setting . . . . . . . . .              77
     4.8   Appendix: Additional Claims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         81



II    Derivative Pricing                                                                       83

5 Background and Model                                                                         85
     5.1   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    85
     5.2   The Model     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   87
           5.2.1   Arbitrage-Free Bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       90

6 Pricing Exotic Derivatives                                                                   91
     6.1   Pricing Based on Multiplicative Regret . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        91
     6.2   Price Bounds for a Variety of Options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         92
     6.3   Convex Path-Independent Derivatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           98
     6.4   Discussion of the Bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
     6.5   Empirical Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
7 A Closer Look at Lookback Options                                                   104
  7.1   Revisiting Multiplicative Regret . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
  7.2   Simple Arbitrage-Free Bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
  7.3   Combining Regret Minimization and One-Way Trading            . . . . . . . . . 106
        7.3.1   A Price-Oriented Rule and Bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
        7.3.2   Bounds Based on Competitive Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
  7.4   Discussion of the Bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
  7.5   Empirical Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
  7.6   Appendix: Additional Claims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119

8 Pricing Based on Additive Regret                                                    121
  8.1   Relating Multiplicative Regret to Standard Regret . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
  8.2   Upper Bounds on Option Prices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
        8.2.1   Application to the Polynomial Weights Algorithm . . . . . . . . 125
        8.2.2   Application to the Hedge Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
  8.3   Lower Bounds on Option Prices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
        8.3.1   A Lower Bound on the Price of “at the Money” Call Options . . 130


9 Conclusion                                                                          132
  9.1   Summary of Results and Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132

Appendices                                                                            136

A Additional Claims                                                                   136

B The Black-Scholes Formula                                                           138

Bibliography                                                                          141
List of Tables

 7.1   A comparison of price bounds for lookback options. . . . . . . . . . . . . 119




                                        xii
List of Figures

 6.1   The payoff of a long strangle investment strategy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
 6.2   Empirical results for average strike call options. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102

 7.1   Empirical results for fixed-strike lookback call options. . . . . . . . . . . 118




                                         xiii
Chapter 1


Introduction

Consider an American company owner who employs workers in the United States and
does most of his business in Europe. Naturally, the income of his company is mostly
in euros. However, the company’s expenses, mainly workers’ salaries, are in dollars.
As a result, any increase in the dollar-euro exchange rate decreases the income of the
company in dollar terms, while the expenses remain the same. If the owner perceives
a real chance for an appreciation of the dollar, he should address the risk of not being
able to pay salaries on time.
   How can this risk be mitigated? Setting aside enough dollars ahead of time would
work, but it requires that the company have very large sums at its disposal, which
might not be the case. There is obviously a need for some sort of insurance against an
appreciation of the dollar. Such insurance exists in the form of an option.
   Options are securities that allow their holders to buy or sell a certain asset for
a given price at some future time. Thus, they act as insurance against a change in
the value of an asset, in this case, dollars. A holder of an option on the dollar-euro
exchange rate may buy a certain amount of dollars for a set price in euros at some
future time. In return for this insurance contract, the company owner would need to
pay some premium to the option writer, and with this payment his worries would be
over.
   The technical step of buying insurance clearly does not eliminate the risk. Rather,
risk simply changes hands for a cost. This basic transaction also masks a profound
problem, that of putting a price on the uncertainty associated with future events.
Pricing options and more general types of securities is one aspect of this problem, and
it is one of the primary concerns of this work.

                                           1
2                                                     CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

    Predicting future outcomes is a chief objective of statistics and machine learning.
It is therefore reasonable to appeal to those disciplines for methods of coping with
uncertainty. For the example above, it would seem natural to suggest a statistical
model for the euro-dollar exchange rate that is based on past values. One might also
employ sophisticated machine learning algorithms for predicting the future rate using
any number of relevant financial indicators as input. Given such tools, one could hope
to quantify the risk using a prediction of the exchange rate along with an estimate of
the accuracy of the prediction.




    There are, however, serious objections to this type of solution. The first one is that
the very principle of inducing future behavior from past data, though firmly estab-
lished in the natural sciences, may be called into question for some scenarios, including
financial ones. In the famous words of [78], “The man who has fed the chicken ev-
ery day throughout its life at last wrings its neck instead, showing that more refined
views as to the uniformity of nature would have been useful to the chicken.” In this
example, the outcome of every day is clearly not randomly chosen, making prediction
particularly difficult. Consider then another iconic example, where a large random
sample of the swan population is used to estimate the probability of finding a black
swan [78, 86]. Predicting the color of a random swan based on this estimate would be
accurate with high probability. However, if a sufficiently high cost is associated with
prediction mistakes, then the expected cost incurred by the prediction might still be
unacceptably high. In particular, rare events might not appear in past samples but
still have a significant effect on future costs.




    A second objection to a statistical solution is that the risk may be successfully
mitigated using methods that are entirely non-statistical. In our example, the option
writer may eliminate future exchange rate uncertainty by changing euros for dollars
immediately. This gives an upper bound on the option price that is independent of
any statistical model for the exchange rate that one might come up with. In fact, this
method of eliminating risk will work even if the future exchange rate is determined by
an adversary and is not statistical at all. Such reasoning is clearly more robust and
seems more justifiable than statistical modeling.
1.1. ARBITRAGE-FREE PRICING                                                              3

1.1     Arbitrage-Free Pricing


The method of setting aside enough dollars to cover future payments is a special case
of a whole class of strategies. Let us re-examine the future obligation of the option
writer. At a future time, she is obliged to provide a certain amount of dollars for a
given amount of euros, and for making this commitment she is paid a fee at the present
time. It is now up to the option writer to protect herself against future risk. This can be
done not only by setting aside enough dollars immediately but also by trading in euros
and dollars up until the day of payment (or option expiration). The key requirement of
such trading strategies is that no matter how the market fares, the option writer would
be left with enough money to cover her obligation to the option holder.




1.1.1    The Arbitrage-Free Assumption


How does the existence of such strategies relate to the price of an option? The answer
is surprisingly straightforward. On the one hand, we have an option that guarantees
its holder a future payment for a given price. On the other hand, we have a trading
strategy that requires a one-time investment to set up and then continues to trade,
always ending up with more money than the option pays. Thus, the option cannot
cost more than the setup cost of the strategy, and this provides an upper bound on
the price of the option. Similarly, if we had a strategy that always ended up with less
money than the option’s payoff, it would give us a lower bound on the option price.

   The above statements rely on the intuitive assumption that if one asset is always
worth more than another asset in some future time, then it must be worth more at
the present time as well. If this were not the case, one might buy the cheaper asset
and sell the more expensive asset at the present time, wait until the order of values is
reversed, and make a riskless profit on the entire deal. Such a price anomaly, or arbitrage
opportunity, cannot persist, because traders rush to buy the asset that is cheaper at
present and sell the asset that is expensive at present. This process continues until the
arbitrage opportunity vanishes. Thus, we rely on the arbitrage-free assumption, which
is the sensible assertion that such obvious arbitrage opportunities cannot exist.
4                                                   CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

1.1.2   Regret Minimization

Arbitrage-free pricing requires a trading strategy whose returns always surpass the
payment by the option writer. The method of buying dollars immediately is a trivial
example of such a strategy, but it would do poorly if the dollar ended up depreciating
against the euro. The position of the option writer would obviously be improved if she
knew the exchange rate at the day the option expires. If she knew that the dollar would
appreciate, her strategy would be to keep only dollars. On the other hand, if she knew
that the euro would appreciate, she would keep only euros. Lacking clairvoyance, the
option writer might attempt to find a trading strategy that would never fall too far
behind the best of those two courses of action. In other words, she could seek to have
minimal regret over not being able to pick the optimal course of action to start with.
Such strategies may be devised within the theory of online learning.



1.2     Online Learning

Online learning is a major branch of modern machine learning, with roots going back to
the works of Hannan [45] and Blackwell [12] in the 1950’s. In a typical online learning
scenario, a learner plays a game against an adversary over multiple rounds. Each of
the players has a set of allowable actions, and on each round, both players pick their
actions simultaneously. Once the actions are chosen, the learner suffers a loss which is
some fixed function of the pair of actions. At the end of the game, the summed losses
of the learner may be compared with the summed losses of playing a single fixed action
throughout the game. The regret of the learner is the difference between its summed
losses and the summed losses of playing the best fixed action. The goal of the learner
is to guarantee small regret regardless of the actions taken by the adversary. The
exact regret guarantees that may be achieved depend upon the specifics of the game.
Nevertheless, for broad classes of games, a learner may always achieve per-round regret
that tends to zero as the number of rounds goes to infinity, or no-regret learning.
    This game formulation may be applied to the case of the option on the exchange
rate. The rounds are trading periods, the learner (option writer) has to choose on
every round a fraction of funds to be held in dollars, and the adversary (the market)
“chooses” a change in the exchange rate. The loss in a single round is the logarithm
of the ratio between the asset value of the learner before and after the round, which
1.2. ONLINE LEARNING                                                                    5

depends only on the pair of actions chosen on the round itself. The sum of the losses at
the end of the game equals minus the logarithm of the relative gain of the learner. The
regret is thus the logarithm of the ratio between the gain of the best currency and the
gain of the learner. The smaller the regret guarantee achievable by some online learning
algorithm, the tighter the upper bound one might get on the price of the option.
   The fact that small regret may be guaranteed at all is remarkable and counter-
intuitive, even for the simple game between the option writer and the market. It is,
after all, impossible for any algorithm to know which of the two asset types would do
better in the next round. The solution to this seeming paradox lies in two observations.
First, the algorithm is compared to the best fixed asset, not to the best trading strategy
with hindsight. Second, while the losses on each single round are unpredictable, it is
impossible for any adversary to hide the cumulative performance of each asset. By
allocating funds to each asset in correspondence to its cumulative gains, an online
learning algorithm can reduce the fraction placed with a consistently bad asset and
thus perform comparably to the best asset.


1.2.1   Specific Settings of Online Learning

The properties of an online learning game depend on the specific details of its deci-
sion sets, loss function, the exact nature of the information revealed to the learner in
each round, and possibly other restrictions. Some important settings and modes are
described below.
   The best expert setting is perhaps the most widely researched type of online game.
In this model, the adversary chooses a vector of real bounded values, and the learner
chooses a probability vector of the same length. The loss of the learner is then defined
as the dot product of the two vectors. The adversary’s vector may be seen as the cost
of following the advice of several experts (which the adversary may influence). The
choice of the learner may be interpreted as a random choice of a single expert. The
notion of ’experts’ may be used to capture different heuristics, roads to take to work,
advertisements to place on a web site, etc.
   The online convex optimization setting is a strict generalization of the best expert
setting. In this model, the learner decides on a point from a fixed convex and compact
set in Euclidean space, and the adversary chooses a convex function from this set to the
reals. The loss of the learner is the value of the adversary’s function on the learner’s
6                                                     CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

point.

     For both settings, an important distinction may be made regarding the feedback
that the learner receives on each round. For example, for a set of experts predicting
the weather, the learner has access to the losses of all experts, namely, full information.
However, in the case of ad placement or choosing from a pool of slot machines, the
learner knows only the loss of the choice it made. This feedback mode is known as the
multi-armed bandit or simply bandit setting, in reference to the last example.

     Finally, crucial distinctions may also be drawn with respect to the sequence of
choices that are made by the adversary. The amount of fluctuation or variability in
this sequence (which may be measured in various ways) affects the regret bounds the
learner may achieve. A low level of variability has the intuitive effect of helping the
learner track the adversary’s moves. The work of the learner may also be facilitated
by redundancy in the expert sets. Specifically, if there is only a small number of high-
quality experts, or if many experts are near-duplicates of other experts, then better
regret bounds may be achieved. These aspects and other variants of the online learning
theme will be discussed in detail throughout this work, particularly in Chapters 3 and
4.



1.3      Competitive Analysis and Pricing

Recall the company owner who pulled through a euro devaluation using options on the
exchange rate. The tide has turned, and an unexpected appreciation in the euro-dollar
rate means that he has a surplus in euros. He intends to change these euros for dollars
and invest in expanding his business. The exchange rate fluctuates continually, and
he would naturally seek to make the change at the highest possible rate. This is the
problem of search for the maximum or one-way trading.

     Suppose the owner decides that he will make the change within the next month.
Although he does not wish to guess exactly how the prices are generated, he is willing
to make the reasonable assumption that the rate will not go above four times or below
a quarter of the current rate. The owner then decides on the following strategy: He
will change three quarters of the euros right away and another quarter only if the
rate exceeds twice the current rate. If this event never occurs, he will simply sell the
remaining euros at the end of the month.
1.3. COMPETITIVE ANALYSIS AND PRICING                                                     7

   Now, if the rate never reaches twice the current rate (suppose this rate is 1), the
worst that can happen in terms of the owner’s regret is that the rate goes to 2 and then
plummets to 41 . In that case, the owner could get 2 with the benefit of hindsight, but
he ends up with 34 · 1 + 41 · 14 = 16
                                   13
                                      , a ratio of 32
                                                   13 . If the rate exceeds 2 at some point,

the worst scenario is that it goes all the way to 4, in which case the optimal rate is
4, but the actual sum obtained by the owner is 43 · 1 + 41 · 2 = 54 , a ratio of 16
                                                                                  5 , higher

than the first case. However, compare this strategy to simply changing all the euros
immediately. In case the rate shoots up to 4, the ratio between the optimal rate and the
actual return is 4, higher than 16
                                 5 , the highest ratio possible using the strategy chosen

by the owner. Thus, using a simple strategy, the owner may improve his competitive
ratio, which upper bounds the ratio between the outcome of the best possible strategy
in hindsight and what his online strategy yields in practice [85].

   There is another course of action available to the company owner beside one-way
trading, which is to buy insurance against a rise in the value of the euro within the
next month. Such insurance is available in the form of a European fixed-strike lookback
call option. This type of security gives its holder the right to receive the difference
between the maximal price of an asset over the lifetime of the option, and some pre-
agreed price (the strike price). If the maximal price of the asset between the issuing
of the option and its expiration rises above the strike price, the holder of the option
may receive the difference. This dependence on the maximal, rather than the final,
asset price constitutes the difference between this option and a standard European call
option.

   The option writer is again faced with the task of ensuring that she is protected
in any possible contingency. She has to determine the amount of money required to
cover her obligation and thereby know how much to charge for writing the option.
Using a one-way trading strategy, the writer can ensure some minimal ratio between
the exchange rate she will get eventually and the highest exchange rate by which she
might be obliged to pay the holder. By using enough cash for one-way trading, she
is guaranteed to be covered, given minimal assumptions, as mentioned in the above
example.

   However, this strategy ignores the threshold below which no payment takes place
at all. If this threshold is very high, for example, a hundred times the current rate, it
is practically impossible that any payment will take place. In contrast, if the threshold
8                                                      CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

is zero, payment will always take place. In Chapter 7 it will be shown that the option
writer can guard both against the change in rate and the event of crossing the threshold,
by combining one-way trading and a regret minimization algorithm.



1.4     An Overview of Related Literature

1.4.1    Derivative Pricing in the Finance Literature

There is an immense body of work on derivative pricing in the financial literature, and
only a very short glimpse may be offered here. The most influential works on this
fundamental problem in finance are the seminal papers of Black and Scholes [11] and
Merton [68] on pricing the European call option. Their pricing formula and model
assume both an arbitrage-free market and a geometric Brownian motion stochastic
process for stock prices. They show that changes in the option price may be exactly
replicated by dynamically trading in the stock. By the arbitrage-free assumption, this
trading strategy implies a pricing for the option. The Black-Scholes-Merton model has
been used to price numerous types of derivatives (see, e.g., [57] for an exposition of
derivative pricing). Of specific relevance to this work is the pricing of the fixed-strike
lookback option, obtained in [30]. Another relevant work is that of [20], who show,
among other things, how the prices of call options determine the price of any stock
derivative whose payoff depends only on the final stock price.
    The assumptions of The Black-Scholes-Merton model have long been known to con-
flict with empirical evidence. For example, actual prices exhibit discrete jumps rather
than follow a continuous process as implied by the model. To account for that, various
models, such as the jump-diffusion model of [69], have incorporated jumps into the
stochastic process governing price changes. Empirical evidence shows also that asset
prices do not in reality follow a lognormal distribution, as would be implied by a ge-
ometric Brownian motion process [67]. A further empirical inconsistency involves the
“volatility smile” phenomenon, namely, that the prices of call options with different
strike prices on the same asset imply different values for the volatility (standard devi-
ation) parameter of the assumed Brownian process. These problems motivated much
research into replacing Brownian motion with more general Lévy processes (see [29] and
[79] for a coverage of Lévy processes and their uses in finance and pricing in particular).
    While the predominant approach to derivative pricing in the financial community re-
1.4. AN OVERVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE                                                    9

mains that of stochastic modeling, there are some results on robust, model-independent
pricing. We mention here the works by Hobson et al., who priced various derivatives
in terms of the market prices of call options with various strikes (see [54] for a review
of results). These works assume an arbitrage-free market, but otherwise make only
minimal, non-stochastic assumptions. Given a derivative, they devise a strategy that
involves trading in call options and always has a payoff superior to that of the deriva-
tive; thus, the cost of initiating the strategy is an upper bound on the derivative’s price.
In the specific case of fixed-strike lookback options with zero strike [55], this strategy
consists of one-way trading in call options, and the obtained price bound is shown to
be tight in the assumed model.


1.4.2     Regret Minimization

Regret minimization research is primarily a creation of the last two or three decades,
but its roots can be traced to 1950’s works, which were motivated by problems in game
theory.
   Hannan [45] gave the first no-regret algorithm in the context of a repeated game,
where a player wishes to approximate the utility of the best action with hindsight.
He suggested that a player use a strategy of adding a random perturbation to the
summed past utilities of each action and then choosing the action with the minimal
perturbed utility. He then showed that the per-round regret of this strategy (now
known generically as Follow the Perturbed Leader) tends to zero as the number of
game rounds increases, regardless of the other players’ strategies.
   Blackwell’s classic work on approachability [12] considered a generalization of a two-
player zero-sum repeated game where the utility (equivalently, loss) matrix contains
vector elements. For one-dimensional losses, von Neumann’s minimax theorem implies
a strategy whereby the minimizing player’s average utility may arbitrarily approach
the set of reals upper bounded by the value of the game. Blackwell’s approachability
theorem characterized the high dimensional convex and closed sets that are approach-
able in the scenario of vector utilities as those for which every containing half-space
is approachable. Importantly, the proof gives a constructive algorithm with a conver-
gence rate that is inverse proportional to the square root of the number of rounds. This
result may be shown to yield as a special case a regret minimization algorithm for a
two-player game, a problem of the type examined by Hannan.
10                                                   CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

     The question whether Blackwell’s results somehow stand apart from later work
on regret minimization or are subsumed by it was recently answered by the work of
[1]. These authors showed an equivalence between the approachability theorem and
no-regret learning for a subset of the online convex optimization setting. Namely,
any algorithm for a problem in Blackwell’s setting may be efficiently converted to
an algorithm for a problem in the online convex optimization setting with linear loss
functions, and vice versa.



The best experts setting.       The most well-known algorithm for this setting is the
Hedge or Randomized Weighted Majority algorithm, which was introduced by several
authors [38, 65, 89]. This algorithm gives to each expert a weight that decreases expo-
nentially with its cumulative loss, and then normalizes the weights to obtain probability
values. The rate of this exponential decrease may be controlled by scaling the cumu-
lative loss with a numeric parameter, called the learning rate. This weighting scheme
may be implemented by applying on each round a multiplicative update that decreases
exponentially with the last single-period loss. This algorithm achieves a regret bound
     √
of O( T ln N ) for any loss sequence, where T is the horizon, or length of the game, N
is the number of experts, and the learning rate is chosen as an appropriate function of
both. The bound is optimal since any online learner achieves an expected regret of the
same order against a completely random stream of Bernoulli losses.

     The above result holds whether or not the horizon is known to the learner; a bound
on the horizon may be guessed, and whenever the guess fails the learner may double it
and restart the algorithm (changing the learning rate in the process). This “doubling
trick” technique [24, 90] changes the regret bound only by a multiplicative constant.
An alternative approach for handling the case of an unknown horizon was given in
[9], where a time-dependent learning rate was used, yielding a better constant in the
bound.

     The above bound, while optimal, ignores the actual characteristics of the loss se-
quences. This fact led to much subsequent research attempting to obtain improved
regret bounds given various types of refined scenarios. A scenario in which the best
expert has a small cumulative loss was already considered in [38]. It was shown that
by choosing a different learning rate, one may obtain an improved bound, where the
horizon is replaced by the cumulative loss of the best expert (barring an additive loga-
1.4. AN OVERVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE                                                  11

rithmic factor). This result shares two features with the horizon-based bound. First, a
bound on the cumulative loss of the best expert may be guessed using a doubling trick,
rather than be known in advance. Second, a matching lower bound may be obtained
using a random adversary (a trivial modification of the previous one).

   Subsequent works considered replacing the dependence on the horizon with various
quantities that measure the variation of the loss sequences. The first such result was
given for the Polynomial Weights or Prod algorithm [25], which is a small but significant
modification of Hedge. More concretely, the exponential multiplicative update of Hedge
is replaced by its first order approximation, namely, a linear function of the last single-
period loss. The regret bound for this algorithm has the same form as before, but the
horizon is replaced by a known bound on the maximal quadratic variation of the losses of
any expert, where the quadratic variation is defined as the sum of the squared single-
period losses. Using more complicated doubling tricks, this bound on the quadratic
variation may be guessed, resulting in a bound that features the maximal quadratic
variation of best experts throughout the game. This regret bound, however, contains
some additional factors that are logarithmic in the horizon.

   The authors of [49] obtain an improved regret bound that depends on an adversar-
ial counterpart of the variance of a random variable. As pointed out in [25], such a
dependence is more natural, since for random losses the regret depends on the square
root of the variance. Thus, their variation is defined for each expert as the sum of
the squared deviations from the average loss of the expert, a quantity that is also nec-
essarily smaller than the quadratic variation used in [25]. Their algorithm, Variation
MW, modifies Hedge in a way that decreases the weights of experts exponentially with
their variation as well as their cumulative loss. If a bound on the variation of the
best experts throughout the game is known in advance, the regret bound of Variation
MW substitutes that quantity for the time horizon in the standard regret bound. The
authors show that this upper bound on the variation is not necessary, and using com-
plex doubling tricks they obtain a regret bound that is worse by an additive factor
logarithmic in the horizon.

   More recently, the work of [28] considered a notion of variation appropriate for
scenarios in which the single-period loss values for all experts experience only small
changes from round to round. The maximal such change for each round is squared and
summed over all rounds, defining a new notion of variation. These authors show that
12                                                            CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

running Hedge with a learning rate based on their variation achieves a regret bound
featuring this variation in place of the horizon. Thanks to a standard doubling trick,
no prior knowledge of the variation is required. They show that their bound is optimal
but it seems to be incomparable with the bound of [49].


Online convex optimization.               The online convex optimization setting, introduced
by Zinkevich [92], deals with sequential decision making problems where the learner
chooses a decision from a compact and convex set in Euclidean space and the loss
is the value of an adversarially chosen convex function applied to the decision. The
regret of the learner is measured with respect to the best fixed decision. This setting
generalizes the best experts setting, where the decisions are probability vectors and the
loss functions are linear.1 It also captures additional types of problems. One example
is portfolio selection, where the learner decides on the proportions of funds to invest in
various assets. Here the decision is still a probability vector, but the loss function is
logarithmic rather than linear. Another is online path planning [59], where on each day
a commuter chooses the road to follow from home to work and suffers a loss in the form
of delay for each road segment. Here the decisions are vectors with 0/1 entries, rather
than probability vectors, indicating whether each road segment is used or not. While a
representation of this last problem as an experts problem is possible, with each feasible
combination of road segments as an expert, it would require an exponential number
of experts. Importantly, Zinkevich’s more general problem setting also allows for the
application of powerful tools from convex optimization in devising regret minimization
algorithms.
         For this general new setting, Zinkevich introduced the Online Gradient Descent
algorithm and showed that it has vanishing regret. This algorithm as well as Hedge
have been shown to be special cases of a more general meta-algorithm, Regularized
Follow the Leader [47, 82]. This algorithm is a more subtle version of the strategy
that greedily chooses at each time the decision that minimizes the current cumulative
loss, or “Follow the Leader”. More concretely, it adds a strongly convex regularizing
function of the decision to the cumulative loss before minimizing the expression. It
     1
    It should be clarified, however, that prediction with expert advice may be defined in a much more
general way, which generalizes even online convex optimization. The best expert setting, which is
considered here, is just a special case of this general setting, and is sometime referred to as “decision
theoretic online learning”. See [23] for a thorough exposition of the general theory of prediction with
expert advice.
1.4. AN OVERVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE                                                           13

should be commented that the same algorithm, albeit using a random perturbation
instead of regularization, had been applied in [59] to optimization problems that are
not necessarily convex, but efficiently solvable.2 Regularized Follow the Leader, in turn,
is closely linked to the primal-dual approach of the Mirror Descent algorithm [70] (see
[47], for example, for details).
      The most basic regret bounds for Online Gradient Descent and more generally, for
Regularized Follow the Leader, depend on the square root of the horizon [47, 92]. The
constants depend on the diameter of the decision set and the properties of the loss
and regularization functions. This dependence on the horizon is optimal in general for
linear cost functions [46], a fact proved, as before, by invoking a stochastic adversary
and lower bounding the expected regret. This bound can be dramatically improved if
the loss functions are strictly convex with a bounded gradient, or more generally, exp-
concave. In that case, a regret bound logarithmic in the horizon may be achieved by
the Online Newton Step algorithm [51], based on the Newton method for optimization.
      The authors of [49] show that in the case of linear loss functions (the dot product
with a loss vector), the horizon in the regret bound may be replaced with a certain no-
tion of variation. This variation is defined as the sum of the squared Euclidean distances
between the loss vectors and their average. They prove their result for Regularized Fol-
low the Leader used specifically with the squared Euclidean norm as a regularizer. A
standard doubling trick negates any need for prior information regarding the magni-
tude of this variation. Using the same algorithm, a similar variational quantity may
also replace the horizon in the logarithmic regret bound, for the special case where all
the loss functions are a single convex function applied to arbitrary linear functions [48].
Here the vectors of the arbitrary linear functions are used to calculate the variation.
      These results are strengthened by the authors of [28], who use a different type of
variation, geared at scenarios where the gradients of the loss functions may change
only little in Euclidean norm from round to round. These maximal normed differences
are squared and summed over all rounds, yielding their variation. Importantly, for the
scenarios considered in [48, 49], this new variation may be upper bounded in terms of
the former variation, but can be much smaller in scenarios of gradual change. Using
a modification of the Mirror Descent algorithm, the authors of [28] provide regret
bounds that replace the horizon with their new variation both for linear costs (square

  2
      As commented earlier, this method of random perturbation in turn originates with Hannan.
14                                                   CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

root regret bound) and for strictly convex losses satisfying some smoothness conditions
(logarithmic regret bound).



The multi-armed bandit setting.          The multi-armed bandit problem was first con-
sidered by Thompson [87], who dealt with the problem of deciding which of two medical
treatments is superior, while also minimizing the harm to patients. It was also con-
sidered in [76] as an important instance of the general problem of sequential design of
experiments in statistical theory. The motivation in both cases comes from the observa-
tion that sampling schemes that adapt to the observed data “on the fly” allow for better
decision making than fixed schemes decided in advance. In the simplest multi-armed
bandit instance described in [76], two biased coins are sampled with the purpose of
maximizing the number of heads. If one of the coins is more biased toward heads than
the other, it is clearly advantageous to quickly change the sampling policy so as to focus
on that coin. A solution to this problem needs to strike an optimal balance between
refining the probability estimates (exploration) and acting on them (exploitation).

     This problem was generalized to multiple actions with general reward distributions
and different types of constraints and has been the subject of much research. More
recently, an adversarial version, namely, with an adversary controlling the rewards
(equivalently, losses) on each round, was introduced [8]. In the adversarial setting
the goal of maximizing the outcome needs to be replaced with the goal of minimizing
the regret to the best action (or arm, in a multi-armed slot machine). This problem
resembles the best expert setting with the crucial difference that only the loss of the
chosen expert (arm) is revealed to the learner and not the full loss information. This
difference reflects the situation in many practical scenarios, such as ad placement, where
feedback is available only for the chosen action.

     In what follows we will mention only selected results and focus primarily on the ad-
versarial setting. For a recent comprehensive survey of the multi-armed bandit problem,
see [21].

     In the stochastic case, the goal may be formalized as minimizing the pseudo-regret,
which is the difference between the expected reward of always using the best arm and
the expected reward of the sampling policy. The seminal work of [64] introduced the
method of maintaining an upper confidence bound for the expected reward of each arm,
and always choosing the arm with the highest bound. They show that the pseudo-regret
1.4. AN OVERVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE                                                           15

of their policy has asymptotic behavior that is logarithmic in the horizon, and that this
dependence is optimal. The UCB1 algorithm of [7] provides a simple upper confidence
bound policy that achieves a logarithmic pseudo-regret uniformly over time, rather
than just asymptotically.

       For the adversarial setting, the authors of [8] introduce the Exp3 algorithm, which is
a natural modification of Hedge to the bandit setting.3 The difference from Hedge stems
from the fact that single-period rewards for an action are generally unknown, unless
the action is the one chosen. Exp3 overcomes this problem by calculating unbiased
estimates for these rewards. This algorithm is shown in [8] to achieve expected regret
               √                                                          √
bounded by O( T N ln N ), where the best possible value is shown to be Ω( T N ) even
for pseudo-regret.4 Variants of Exp3 are shown to obtain this bound for an unknown
horizon and achieve a similar bound for the actual regret with high probability.

       The gap between the upper and lower bounds on the expected regret was closed
by the INF algorithm [4] for oblivious (non-adaptive) adversaries. That algorithm
generalizes Exp3 and was shown in [6] to be a special case of Mirror Descent.

       The horizon in the Exp3 bound may be replaced by the cumulative reward of
the best arm without prior knowledge of that quantity. This was shown in [8] for
oblivious (non-adaptive) adversaries and later in [5] for general adversaries and with
high probability.

       The problem of replacing the horizon with variation was explored in [50]. They
examine a generalization of the adversarial bandit problem to the online convex opti-
mization setting with linear costs. The difference from the full information setting is
that the learner does not observe the whole loss (or reward) vector after each round,
but only the loss corresponding to the chosen decision, namely, the dot product of
the decision and the loss vector. The notion of variation considered is the same as
in [49], that is, the sum of the squared Euclidean distances between the loss vectors
and their average. The authors give an algorithm whose expected regret is bounded
by the square root of the variation but is also poly-logarithmic in the horizon. The
algorithm is based on Regularized Follow the Leader, and replaces actual losses with
loss estimates obtained using the technique of “reservoir sampling”.

   3
     The original formulation included an additional operation of smoothing the probabilities with a
uniform distribution. A subsequent formulation, given in [21, Chapter 3], does not contain it.
   4
     It can be shown that the expected regret is never smaller than the pseudo-regret.
16                                                     CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

1.4.3     Robust Trading and Pricing in the Learning Literature

In contrast to the finance literature, work on financial problems in machine learning
has focused primarily on adversarial scenarios, rather than on stochastic ones. In
addition, trading is seen primarily as taking place over discrete time periods. The
focus of most research has been on devising portfolio selection algorithms with robust
performance guarantees. Other results have dealt with pricing derivatives, assuming
an arbitrage-free market, but otherwise attempting to keep assumptions about the
market to a minimum. It should be stressed, though, that by virtue of the arbitrage-
free assumption, trading strategies with robust performance guarantees may be used to
obtain bounds on the prices of derivatives. This fact, which will be explained further
below, means that the division between trading and pricing is not entirely clear cut.


Portfolio selection.     The main financial problem dealt with in the learning literature
is portfolio selection, where an online algorithm trades in several assets in an adversarial
market with the goal of maximizing returns. The optimal algorithm for this problem
is simple: On each round, invest all funds in the asset that gains the most in the
coming round. However, this algorithm clearly depends on future information, and it is
hopeless to compete against it. Instead, the task of maximizing the returns is replaced
with that of minimizing the regret with respect to a set of benchmark strategies. A
regret minimization algorithm is thus guaranteed to obtain returns comparable to the
best strategy in the set. By choosing a rich and powerful set of benchmark investment
strategies, one hopes this guarantee would also lead to good returns. It should be
emphasized that in financial contexts, the appropriate notion of regret is measured
by the ratio of the final wealths, rather than the customary difference, since we are
interested in percentage returns.
     The first such robust portfolio selection algorithm was given by Cover [31], where
the benchmark was the set of all constantly rebalanced portfolios, namely, strategies
that always keep a fixed fraction of funds in each asset. These strategies include hold-
ing the best single asset as a trivial case, but the best such strategy may outperform
the best asset significantly. Cover’s algorithm, the universal portfolio, is equivalent
to initially dividing wealth uniformly between all possible constantly rebalanced port-
folios, and performing no further action. He shows that the ratio between the final
wealths of the best constantly rebalanced portfolio and his algorithm is upper bounded
1.4. AN OVERVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE                                                  17

by a polynomial in the number of rounds. In other words, the wealths of the two al-
gorithms have the same asymptotic growth rate. The computational complexity of the
algorithm, however, is exponential in the number of assets. Cover’s result prompted
subsequent work that incorporated side information and transaction costs, proved that
the regret of the universal portfolio is optimal, improved computational efficiency, and
considered short selling [14, 32, 58, 73, 91]. The work of [52] tackled the problem with
a different algorithm using a simple multiplicative update rule. Their algorithm had
linear complexity in the number of assets, but gave worse regret bounds compared with
the universal portfolio.

   Portfolio selection was cast in the online convex optimization setting in the work
of [3]. For this problem, the decisions are probability vectors describing the allocation
of wealth to assets, and the single-period loss of an asset is minus the logarithm of its
single-period price ratio. The single-period loss of the algorithm is minus the logarithm
of the dot product of its decision and the asset price ratios. The authors of [3] show that
the Online Newton Step algorithm, which is efficiently implementable, achieves regret
logarithmic in the number of rounds. This dependence on the horizon is equivalent
to that of Cover’s algorithm, after standard (additive) regret is translated into multi-
plicative terms. Furthermore, the decision space is exactly all constantly rebalanced
portfolios.

   The variational results of both [48] and [28] are applicable to portfolio selection in
its online convex optimization representation. The horizon in the logarithmic regret
may thus be replaced with variation. In both cases the vectors featuring in the variation
are the single-period price ratios of the assets (equivalently, the percentage returns).
As noted before, the result of [28] is stronger in some sense, because their variation
may be bounded in terms of the variation of [48], but not vice versa. These bounds are
a great improvement over the horizon-dependent one under the realistic assumption
that the variability is much smaller than the number of trading periods. Furthermore,
experiments conducted with the algorithm of [48] show no real change in its regret as
the trading frequency increases.

   Benchmark sets other than constantly rebalanced portfolios have also been consid-
ered. The algorithms of [84] achieve bounded regret with respect to the best switching
regime between several fixed investment strategies, with and without transaction costs.
This benchmark was also considered in [62] for a portfolio containing two assets: stock
18                                                     CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

and cash. Several results that will be mentioned further down in the context of deriva-
tive pricing may also be interpreted as choosing various other benchmark sets.

     There are other approaches that rather seek to directly exploit the underlying statis-
tics of the market [17, 44], but without assuming a specific price model. The authors of
[44] show that their methods achieve the optimal asymptotic growth rate almost surely,
assuming the markets are stationary and ergodic. Both these works do not, however,
provide robust adversarial guarantees.

     Several of the works mentioned also included experiments on real price data, and
these highlight possible gaps in the current theoretical understanding. For example,
the robust algorithms of [3, 52, 84] were shown to outperform the (optimal) universal
portfolio on real data, with the latter two shown to even outperform the best constantly
rebalanced portfolio. The algorithms of [17, 44], while having weak or no guarantees,
were shown to achieve extraordinarily high yields.



Derivative pricing.      In the Black-Scholes-Merton setup, derivatives are priced by de-
vising a trading strategy that exactly replicates their payoff and applying the arbitrage-
free assumption to derive an exact price. The same principle may still be used in an
adversarial setting, modeled as a game between the market and an investor [80]. In
adversarial settings, exact replication is not necessarily possible, but even then, the
arbitrage-free assumption may be used to obtain price bounds. To obtain an upper
bound, one requires a strategy whose payoff super-replicates (always dominates) the
payoff of the derivative. The setup cost of the strategy is then an upper bound on the
derivative’s price. The same holds for sub-replicating strategies and lower bounds on
the price.

     The authors of [80] show that the Black-Scholes-Merton analysis may be extended
to an adversarial setting assuming there exists a tradable variance derivative. This
derivative pays periodic dividends equal to the squared relative change in the price of
the stock. The investor’s strategy involves trading in the stock as well as the derivative.
Their analysis is applied to both discrete and continuous time, but it makes strong
assumptions on the smoothness of the price of both the stock and the derivative.

     The European call option was priced in a very general adversarial setting in the
work of [35]. Their discrete-time model includes two parameters: a bound on the sum
of the squared single-period returns of the stock (quadratic variation) and a bound
1.4. AN OVERVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE                                                            19

on its absolute single-period returns. The quadratic variation serves as an adversarial
counterpart of stochastic volatility. Apart from these two constraining parameters, the
model is completely adversarial and allows for price jumps and dependence.
       These authors upper bound the price of call options in two different ways. One con-
verts a regret minimization algorithm for the best expert setting into a super-replication
strategy and bounds its initial cost through a bound on the regret. The other directly
calculates the minimal cost required to super-replicate the payoff of the option, thus ob-
taining an optimal arbitrage-free upper bound on the price in their model. This is done
by producing a recursive expression for the minimax price and strategy for the investor,
and showing that it can be approximated efficiently using dynamic programming. It
should be commented that the trading strategy for the optimal bound is unrestricted
with respect to taking loans and short selling the stock, while the regret minimization-
based trading strategy requires neither.5 The authors also obtain a lower bound on the
price of the option with a specific strike price using a tailored sub-replicating strategy.
       The optimal upper bound of [35] is only slightly worse than the Black-Scholes-
Merton price, and demonstrates a volatility smile behavior as seen in practice. It
is also shown that for some settings, the regret-based price depends on the square
root of the quadratic variation (like the Black-Scholes-Merton price for small values
of the quadratic variation), while their lower bound depends on it linearly (hence,
suboptimally).
       The regret minimization-based method of [35] will be pursued further and discussed
in mathematical detail in the financial part of this thesis. It relies on the crucial
observation that the robust pricing of a call option may be cast as a robust portfolio
selection problem, where the assets are stock and cash, and the benchmark set is very
simple: Hold cash, or hold the stock. Given a lower bound on the ratio between the
final wealths of some algorithm and the best strategy in the set, the arbitrage-free
assumption implies an upper bound on the price of a derivative that pays the same as
the best strategy in the set. The payoff of this derivative and the payoff of a call option
differ by only a fixed amount (the strike price) so the same holds for their prices.
       It should be commented that the principle used in [35] for a very specific benchmark
set may be applied to any benchmark set. Thus, for example, the results for the portfolio
selection algorithms of [3, 28, 31, 48] imply arbitrage-free price upper bounds for a
   5
    The regret minimization-based strategy does require that the investor possess the strike price in
cash before trade begins.
20                                                     CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

(theoretical) derivative that pays the same as the best constantly rebalanced portfolio.

     For the simple benchmark set of holding cash or holding the stock, the authors of
[35] required a multiplicative version of an algorithm for the best expert setting, to be
used with two experts: one holding cash and one holding the stock. They achieved this
by modifying the Polynomial Weights algorithm [25] to obtain multiplicative, rather
than additive, regret guarantees. This specific algorithm also has the great advantage
of providing regret bounds (and resulting price bounds) that are based on variation.

     The work of [34], which is extended in [33], considers pricing a class of American-
style lookback options. More specifically, the option holder may choose any time to
receive the payoff, which is some known non-negative right-continuous increasing func-
tion of the maximal price of the stock at the time of the payoff. They give an exact
characterization of optimal strategies for super-replicating the payoff of the options,
yielding an arbitrage-free price upper bound that is optimal in their fully-adversarial
model. Their strategies are one-way trading, consisting of initially buying a specific
amount of stocks and then selling fractions of the amount whenever the stock price
reaches specific levels. They also consider extensions to payoff functions that depend
on both the maximal price and the current price of the stock.

     The methodology of [33] is applied in [63] to options whose payoff is defined in terms
of the upcrossings of the price of the stock. More specifically, the option’s payoff is the
maximal value of some function applied to all the price intervals that the stock price
crossed upwards. The functions considered take the end points of an interval as inputs
and obey some natural regularity conditions.

     It should be commented that the results of [33, 63] may also be seen through the lens
of portfolio selection (with cash and stock as the assets), since the options guarantee a
function of the best payoff of some benchmark set. In [33] it is the best one-way trading
strategy, and in [63] it is the best “buy low, sell high” strategy.

     Finally, the work of [2] returns to the problem of optimal minimax pricing, which
was investigated in [35], and considers the minimax pricing of European options whose
payoff is a convex and Lipschitz-continuous function of the final stock price. They
show that under strong smoothness conditions on the stock price path, the optimal
adversarial strategy for the market converges to a geometric Brownian motion. This
implies that the Black-Scholes-Merton price, which is proved by assuming a specific
stochastic price process, also holds for their adversarial model. It should be noted,
1.4. AN OVERVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE                                                   21

though, that the limitations they place on the adversary do not allow for discontinuous
jumps, which are allowed in [35]. It should also be commented that the investor is
allowed unbounded loans and short selling, although the authors conjecture that this
is not in fact necessary for obtaining their results.


1.4.4    Competitive Analysis and One-Way Trading

Competitive analysis was introduced in the classic work of [85]. It is concerned with
obtaining robust performance guarantees for online algorithms with respect to the best
offline algorithm, for miscellaneous scenarios (see [16] for a thorough exposition). In this
framework, online algorithms are designed to minimize the competitive ratio, defined
as the worst-case ratio between the performance of the best offline algorithm and the
performance of the online algorithm. This is slightly different from the goal of regret
minimization, which is to minimize the worst-case difference between the performance
of the best algorithm in a benchmark set and the performance of the online algorithm.
Still, despite the long-observed similarities between them, competitive analysis and
online learning have developed mostly separately (historically and sociologically). For
works that considered a unified framework, the reader is referred to [13] and [22].
   The themes of this thesis intersect with competitive analysis on the single problem
of one-way trading [36]. In a one-way trading scenario, one asset (such as euros)
is converted to another (say, dollars), where the exchange rate fluctuates, and the
goal is to maximize returns. The best offline algorithm simply sells the asset at the
highest possible rate, and an online algorithm is required to achieve the best possible
competitive ratio. This problem is equivalent to a search for the maximum of a series,
since a gradual sale by the algorithm may be interpreted as a single selling point chosen
randomly. The authors of [36] present an algorithm with an optimal competitive ratio
for this problem, assuming upper and lower bounds on the exchange rate are known.
They extend their results to cases where only the ratio of these bounds is known, and
the horizon is possibly unknown.
   It should be noted that for the problem of one-way trading, the gap between com-
petitive analysis and regret analysis all but disappears. In fact, one-way trading may
be seen as a special type of portfolio selection problem defined on two assets. The
benchmark set is all the one-way trading strategies, or even simpler, strategies that sell
the first asset in a single trade.
22                                                    CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

     The work of [36] was related to option pricing in [66], which studied the search
problem where the k highest or lowest values should be found. These authors applied
their competitive analysis to pricing floating-strike lookback calls. This type of security
pays the difference between the stock price at some future time, and the minimal stock
price over the lifetime of the option.



1.5      Contributions in This Dissertation

This work contains contributions both to the general theory of regret minimization and
to its financial applications.
     The general theory part of this work deals both with the properties of existing
regret minimization algorithms and with developing algorithms for new adversarial
scenarios. We prove a surprising regret guaranteeing property for important families
of regret minimization algorithms, that is, we show lower bounds on the regret for any
individual sequence of losses. This fundamental property also has interesting pricing
implications, as explained below. Another contribution deals with realistic cases in
which the adversary does not exercise its full power, and for which general-purpose
regret minimization algorithms are suboptimal. We characterize several such scenarios
and provide optimal new algorithms for coping with them.
     The financial part develops the theory of robust regret minimization-based pric-
ing pioneered in [35]. This theory replaces the classic assumption of a very specific
continuous stochastic price process (geometric Brownian motion) with a minimal and
adversarial model that allows for sharp price jumps as well as price dependence and
momentum, as occur in real markets. Price bounds obtained in this framework are
arguably more robust than ones obtained with classic assumptions and are thus of
considerable interest.
     We apply regret minimization methods to pricing various derivatives. Of particu-
lar interest is the pricing of lookback options, which motivated the development of a
new family of regret minimization algorithms that include a one-way trading element.
Importantly, as in [35], our bounds on the prices of derivatives feature the variation of
asset prices.
     Most of the pricing results provided are upper bounds on derivative prices. However,
we also provide the first optimal lower bound on the price of call options. This bound
1.5. CONTRIBUTIONS IN THIS DISSERTATION                                                  23

has the same asymptotic behavior as the stochastically-based Black and Scholes pricing
and is derived by applying our new lower bounds on individual sequence regret. Another
contribution required for deriving this result is a formula for directly converting general
regret bound results to a trading scenario without the need for algorithmic adaptations
and new proofs. This technical result and the above results serve to bring robust pricing
and the general theory of regret minimization closer together.


1.5.1    Contributions to the Theory of Regret Minimization

Lower bounds on individual sequence regret.               This contribution considers the
problem of finding lower bounds on the regret that hold for any loss sequence. We
focus on the online convex optimization setting with linear loss functions, and consider
a general class of algorithms whose weight vector at time t + 1 is determined as the
gradient of a concave potential function of cumulative losses at time t. We show that this
class includes all linear Regularized Follow the Leader regret minimization algorithms,
which in turn include major regret minimization algorithms such as Hedge and Online
Gradient Descent.
   We first show that algorithms in this class are exactly those that guarantee non-
negative regret for any sequence of losses. This result is surprising, given that this class
includes algorithms specifically designed to uniformly minimize regret.
   A much sharper trade-off result is obtained for the anytime regret, namely, the
maximal regret during the game. We present a bound for the anytime regret that
depends on the quadratic variation of the loss sequence, QT , and the learning rate.
Nevertheless, we show that any learning rate that guarantees a regret upper bound of
  √                              √
O( QT ) necessarily implies an Ω( QT ) anytime regret on any sequence with quadratic
variation QT .
   We prove our result for the case of potentials with negative definite Hessians, and
potentials for the best expert setting satisfying some natural regularity conditions. In
the best expert setting, we give our result in terms of a translation-invariant version of
the quadratic variation. We apply our lower bounds to Hedge and to linear cost Online
Gradient Descent.


Algorithms for scenarios of limited expert set complexity.              In many scenarios,
assuming a fully malicious adversary may be unrealistically pessimistic, while more
24                                                    CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

refined assumptions seem appropriate. In the best expert setting in particular, an
adversary may be limited by various kinds of dependence or redundancy in the set of
experts, making the “effective” number of experts smaller than the nominal number
of experts. We thus study regret minimization bounds in which the dependence on
the number of experts is replaced by measures of the realized complexity of the expert
class. The measures we consider are defined in retrospect given the realized losses.
     We concentrate on two interesting cases. In the first, our measure of complexity
is the number of different “leading experts”, namely, experts that were best at some
point in time. We derive regret bounds that depend only on this measure, independent
of the total number of experts. We also consider a case where all experts remain
grouped in just a few clusters in terms of their realized cumulative losses. Here too,
our regret bounds depend only on the number of clusters determined in retrospect,
which serves as a measure of complexity. We show that our regret bounds are optimal
by proving matching lower bounds on the expected regret of any algorithm against
specially-constructed stochastic adversaries. Our bounds improve on the bounds of
general-purpose algorithms such as Hedge for scenarios where the number of clusters
or leaders is logarithmic in the number of experts. This means that by applying an
extra level of regret minimization to choose between our specialized algorithms and the
general-purpose ones, the best regret bound may be achieved (up to constant factors)
regardless of the adversary’s actual behavior.
     Our results are obtained as special cases of a more general analysis for a novel
setting of branching experts, where the set of experts may grow over time according
to a tree-like structure, determined by an adversary. This setting is of independent
interest since it is applicable in online scenarios where new heuristics (experts) that are
variants of existing heuristics become available over time. For this setting of branching
experts, we give algorithms and analysis that cover both the full information and the
bandit scenarios.


1.5.2    Contributions to Derivative Pricing

Pricing a variety of options.      We apply a unified regret minimization framework to
pricing a variety of options based on the method of [35]. We give variation-based upper
bounds on the prices of various known options, namely, the exchange option, the shout
option, and several types of Asian options. We derive these bounds by considering a
1.5. CONTRIBUTIONS IN THIS DISSERTATION                                                 25

security whose payoff is the maximum of several derivatives. We price this security
based on regret bounds with respect to the underlying derivatives and then show how
to express the above options in terms of it.



Pricing convex path-independent derivatives.             We give robust variation-based
upper bounds on the prices of a wide range of derivatives that are characterized as
convex path-independent derivatives. At their expiration time, these derivatives have a
payoff that is a convex function of the price of a certain underlying asset. We derive
robust upper bounds on the prices of these derivatives given a robust upper bound on
the price of European call options.



Algorithms for pricing lookback options.             We present a new family of regret
minimization algorithms that combines two algorithmic components. One is a regret
minimization component and the other is a one-way trading component, which may only
sell assets. The algorithms in this family have regret guarantees not only with respect to
the best asset (stock or cash, in this case) at the end of the game but also to the maximal
value throughout the game. We translate the performance of the regret minimization
and one-way trading components into explicit variation-based upper bounds on the
price of fixed-strike lookback options. The resulting algorithms are, in general, two-
way trading, that is, both buying and selling assets. These algorithms offer a new
two-way trading solution to the problem of searching for the maximum of an online
sequence studied in the work of [36]. Furthermore, we show that our methods may
achieve better competitive ratios than the optimal one-way trading algorithm of [36].



A method for directly applying regret bounds to pricing.               We develop a new
formula that allows regret bounds to be directly converted to a financial setting. This
method saves the need to specially modify existing best expert algorithms to work in
a trading setup, where the regret is multiplicative in nature, rather than additive. As
a result, existing regret bounds may be used, and there is no need to prove new ones
for the modified algorithms.

   We apply this method to obtain new variation-based price upper bounds that are
applicable in broader settings than that of [35].
26                                                     CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

An optimal lower bound on the price of “at the money” call options.                  Based
on regret minimization techniques, we give for the first time a robust lower bound on
the price of “at the money” call options with the same asymptotic behavior as the
robust upper bound given in [35]. (An “at the money” call option is simply one whose
strike price is equal to the stock price when the option is issued.) We obtain this bound
by combining our theoretic results concerning lower bounds on the anytime regret
of individual sequences with our formula for converting regret bounds of best expert
algorithms to the financial setting. This price bound has the same asymptotic behavior
as the Black-Scholes-Merton price, namely, a dependence on the square root of the
quadratic variation, despite the fact that our assumptions are minimal and adversarial,
rather than stochastic.



1.6      Outline of This Thesis

This work in organized in two parts. The first part contains contributions to the
theory of regret minimization per se. The second part deals with applications of regret
minimization to pricing derivatives.
     Part I is organized as follows. In Chapter 2 we give some required definitions and
background. Chapters 3 and 4 then present two distinct works.
     Chapter 3 presents variation-based regret lower bounds that hold for any sequence
of losses, and apply for a wide range of learners in the online linear optimization setting.
The results in this chapter were published in [42].
     Chapter 4 is concerned with improved regret bounds for best expert scenarios with
redundant sets of experts. These results are derived in a more general setting, where
new experts are allowed to branch from existing experts. This chapter is based on work
published in [43].
     In Part II, Chapter 5 gives background and definitions. Chapter 6 applies the
specially adapted regret minimization algorithm of [35] to derive variation-based upper
bounds on the prices of a wide variety of derivatives. These results are based on work
that appeared in [41].
     Chapter 7 considers the pricing of lookback options in depth, and presents price up-
per bounds based on algorithms that combine regret minimization and one-way trading.
These results are based on the work in [40].
1.6. OUTLINE OF THIS THESIS                                                           27

   In Chapter 8 we show how to directly translate bounds on the loss and regret of
algorithms for the best expert setting into price bounds. This method is then used to
prove a variation-based lower bound on the price of a certain call option, as well as new
price upper bounds. This chapter is based in part on results in [42].
28   CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
       Part I


Regret Minimization




         29
30
Chapter 2


Background and Model

This part of the work deals with pure theoretical aspects of regret minimization. With-
out further ado, we now formally present the basic definitions, facts, and notation to
be used later on.



2.1     Regret Minimization Settings

The Best Expert Setting

The best expert setting is a simple and well-researched setting that exemplifies the
main concepts of regret minimization. In this setting, there are N available experts (or
actions), and at each time step 1 ≤ t ≤ T , an online algorithm A (the learner ) selects
a distribution pt over the N experts. Simultaneously, an adversary selects a loss vector
lt = (l1,t , . . . , lN,t ) ∈ RN , and the algorithm experiences a loss of lA,t = pt ·lt . We denote
       P
Li,t = tτ =1 li,τ for the cumulative loss of expert i at time t, Lt = (L1,t , . . . , LN,t ), and
         P
LA,t = tτ =1 lA,τ for the cumulative loss of A at time t. The regret of A at time T is
RA,T = LA,T − minj {Lj,T }. The aim of a regret minimization algorithm is to achieve
small regret regardless of the sequence of loss vectors chosen by the adversary. The
anytime regret of A is the maximal regret over time, namely, maxt {RA,t }. We will
sometimes use the notation m(t) = arg mini {Li,t }, where we take the smallest such
index in case of a tie. We will also denote L∗t = Lm(t),t for the cumulative loss of the
best expert after t steps.
    We comment that it is customary to impose an additional explicit restriction on the
range of single-period losses, namely, that li,t ∈ [0, 1] for every i and t. This restriction
will be indeed assumed in Chapter 4. However, in Chapter 3 no explicit restriction on

                                                31
32                                           CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND MODEL

losses will be assumed.



     The distribution chosen by the learner is naturally interpreted as a random choice
over the experts. Crucially, the learner makes this choice given full information of past
losses incurred by every expert. The most notable algorithm for this setting is the
Hedge algorithm [38, 65, 89], which is described below.




 The Hedge Algorithm
 Parameters: A learning rate η > 0 and initial weights wi,1 > 0, 1 ≤ i ≤ N .
 For each round t = 1, . . . , T
                                                                  PN
      1. Define probabilities pi,t = wi,t /Wt , where Wt =          i=1 wi,t .


      2. For each expert i = 1, . . . , N , let wi,t+1 = wi,t e−ηli,t .




     Given a bound on the absolute value of the single-period losses li,t , Hedge may be
shown to have bounded regret regardless of the loss sequences chosen by the adversary.
If the learning rate η is tuned solely as a function of time, we achieve the so-called zero
                                                √
order regret bounds, which have the form O( T ln N ).



     In contrast to the full information setting, the adversarial multi-armed bandit (or
bandit) setting limits the learner’s observations in every round of play only to the loss
incurred by the expert it chose. The Exp3 algorithm [8], which is an adaptation of
                                                       √         
Hedge for this setting, obtains a zero order bound of O T N ln N on the expected
regret. Below we give a version of Exp3 taken from [21, Chapter 3]. This version, which
is slightly simpler than the original one, achieves the same bound for the weaker notion
of pseudo-regret, with a proper choice of ηt .
2.1. REGRET MINIMIZATION SETTINGS                                                                     33


  The Exp3 Algorithm
  Parameters: A non-increasing sequence of real numbers η1 , η2 , . . . .
  Let p1 be the uniform distribution over {1, . . . , N }.
  For each round t = 1, . . . , T

        1. Draw an action It from the probability distribution pt .

                                                                                    li,t
        2. For each action i = 1, . . . , N , compute the estimated loss e   li,t =      I {It = i}
                                                                                    pi,t
           and update the estimated cumulative loss L            e i,t−1 + e
                                                         e i,t = L         li,t .
                                                                                   
        3. Compute the new distribution over actions pt+1 = p1,t+1 , . . . , pN,t+1 , where
                                                                
                                                 exp −ηt L e i,t
                                     pi,t+1 = P                      .
                                                N               e k,t
                                                k=1 exp   −η  t L



The Online Linear Optimization Setting

The best expert setting is a special case of the more general setting of online linear
optimization. In this setting, the online learning algorithm, or linear forecaster, chooses
at time t a weight vector xt ∈ K, where K ⊂ RN is a compact and convex set, and
incurs a loss of xt · lt . The regret of a linear forecaster A is then defined as RA,T =
LA,T − minu∈K {u · LT }.1 The best expert setting is simply the case where K = ∆N ,
the probability simplex over N elements.
       A no-regret result for the online linear optimization setting is achieved by the Reg-
ularized Follow The Leader (RFTL) algorithm, defined below.

  Regularized Follow The Leader
  Parameters: A learning rate η > 0 and a strongly convex regularizer function
  R : K → R.
  Let x1 = arg minx∈K {R(x)}.
  For each round t = 1, . . . , T

           Update the weight vector xt+1 = arg minx∈K {x · Lt + (1/η)R(x)}.

       For a continuously twice-differentiable regularizer R, RFTL guarantees, for a proper
   1
    We comment that online linear optimization is in turn a special case of the online convex optimiza-
tion setting. In that more general setting, the algorithm
                                                    P     incurs a loss ofPft (xt ), where ft is a convex
function chosen by the adversary, and the regret is t ft (xt ) − minu∈K { t ft (u)}.
34                                       CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND MODEL
                                 √
choice of η, a regret bound of O( λDT ), where D = maxu∈K {R(u) − R(x1 )} and
λ = maxt,x∈K {l⊤   2     −1
               t [∇ R(x)] lt } [47].

   The RFTL algorithm may be shown to generalize Hedge, where the regularizer
                                                                      P
function is chosen to be the negative entropy function, namely, R(x) = Ni=1 xi log xi .

It also generalizes the Lazy Projection variant of the Online Gradient Descent algorithm
(OGD), defined by the rule xt+1 = arg minx∈K {kx+ηLt k2 }, by choosing R(x) = 12 kxk22 .
For an in-depth discussion of the RFTL algorithm, see [47].


Quadratic variation. We define the quadratic variation of the loss sequence
                        PT        2
l1 , . . . , lT as QT =  t=1 klt k2 . For the best expert setting, we will use the slightly
                                                                       PT           2
different notion of relative quadratic variation, defined as qT =         t=1 δ(lt ) , where

δ(v) = maxi {vi } − mini {vi } for any v ∈ RN . Note that it always holds that qT ≤ 2QT .
We denote Q for a known lower bound on QT and q for a known lower bound on qT .



2.2      Convex Functions

We mention here some basic facts about convex and concave functions that we will
require. For more on convex analysis, see [77], [19], and [71], among others.
     We will discuss functions defined on RN . A function f : C → R is convex, if C is a
convex set and if for every λ ∈ [0, 1] and x, y ∈ C, f (λx+(1−λ)y) ≤ λf (x)+(1−λ)f (y).
The function f is concave if −f is convex. The function f is strictly convex if the
inequality is strict for x 6= y and λ ∈ (0, 1). The function f is strongly convex with
parameter α > 0, if for every x, y ∈ C and λ ∈ [0, 1], f (λx + (1 − λ)y) ≤ λf (x) +
(1 − λ)f (y) − (α/2)λ(1 − λ)kx − yk22 . If f is differentiable on a convex set C, then f
is convex iff for every x, y ∈ C, ∇f (y) · (y − x) ≥ f (y) − f (x) ≥ ∇f (x) · (y − x); f is
strictly convex iff the above inequalities are strict for x 6= y. If f is twice differentiable,
then it is convex iff its Hessian is positive semi-definite: for every x ∈ C, ∇2 f (x)  0;
f is strongly convex with parameter α iff for every x ∈ C, every eigenvalue of ∇2 f (x)
is at least α. The convex conjugate of f (defined on domf ) is the function f ∗ (y) =
supx∈domf {x · y − f (x)}, which is convex, and its effective domain is domf ∗ = {y :
f ∗ (y) < ∞}.


Miscellaneous notation.         For x, y ∈ RN , we denote [x, y] for the line segment be-
tween x and y, namely, {ax + (1 − a)y : 0 ≤ a ≤ 1}. We use the notation conv(A) for
2.3. SEMINORMS                                                                      35

                                                      P
the convex hull of a set A ⊆ RN , that is, conv(A) = { ki=1 λi xi : xi ∈ A, λi ≥ 0, i =
             P
1, . . . , k, ki=1 λi = 1}.


2.3    Seminorms

A seminorm on RN is a function k · k : RN → R with the following properties:

   • Positive homogeneity: for every a ∈ R, x ∈ RN , kaxk = |a|kxk.

   • Triangle inequality: for every x, x′ ∈ RN , kx + x′ k ≤ kxk + kx′ k.

Clearly, every norm is a seminorm. A seminorm satisfies kxk ≥ 0 for every x, and
k0k = 0. However, unlike a norm, kxk = 0 does not imply x = 0. We will not deal
with the trivial all-zero seminorm. Thus, there always exists a vector with non-zero
seminorm, and by homogeneity, there exists a vector with seminorm a for any a ∈ R+ .
Chapter 3


Lower Bounds on Individual
Sequence Regret

3.1     Introduction

For any sequence of losses, it is trivial to tailor an algorithm that has no regret on
that particular sequence. The challenge and the great success of regret minimization
algorithms lie in achieving low regret for every sequence. This bound may still depend
on a measure of sequence smoothness, such as the quadratic variation or variance. The
optimality of such regret upper bounds may be demonstrated by proving the existence
of some “difficult” loss sequences. Their existence may be implied, for example, by
stochastically generating sequences and proving a lower bound on the expected regret
of any algorithm (see, e.g., [23]). This type of argument leaves open the possibility
that the difficult sequences are, in some way, atypical or irrelevant to actual user needs.
In this chapter we address this question by proving lower bounds on the regret of any
individual sequence, in terms of its quadratic variation.
   We first consider the related task of characterizing algorithms that have individual
sequence non-negative regret. We focus our attention on the online linear optimization
setting and on linear forecasters that determine their next weight vector as a function
of current cumulative losses. More specifically, if Lt ∈ RN is the cumulative loss
vector at time t, and xt+1 ∈ K is the next weight vector, then xt+1 = g(Lt ) for some
continuous g. We show that such algorithms have individual sequence non-negative
regret if and only if g is the gradient of a concave potential function. We then show
that this characteristic is shared by all linear cost Regularized Follow the Leader regret

                                            36
3.2. NON-NEGATIVE INDIVIDUAL SEQUENCE REGRET                                          37

minimization algorithms, which include Hedge and linear cost OGD.
   As our main result, we prove a trade-off between the upper bound on an algorithm’s
regret and a lower bound on its anytime regret, namely, its maximal regret for any prefix
                                                                                    √
of the loss sequence. In particular, if the algorithm has a regret upper bound of O( Q)
                                                                           √
for any sequence with quadratic variation Q, then it must have an Ω( Q) anytime
regret on any sequence with quadratic variation Θ(Q).
   We prove our result for two separate classes of continuously twice-differentiable
potentials. One class has negative definite Hessians in a neighborhood of L = 0,
and includes OGD. The other comprises potentials for the best expert setting whose
Hessians in a neighborhood of L = 0 have positive off-diagonal entries; in other words,
such potentials increase the weights of experts as their performance relatively improves,
which is a natural property of regret minimization algorithms. For the first class, we
use the quadratic variation QT . For the best expert setting, however, we use the more
appropriate relative quadratic variation qT .
   We demonstrate our result on linear cost OGD, as an example of a potential with
a negative definite Hessian, and on Hedge, as an example of a best expert potential.
We comment that it will be shown in Part II, Chapter 8 that the bounds obtained for
Hedge in turn imply lower bounds on the price of options.


Related work.      As already observed, there are numerous results that provide worst
case upper bounds for regret minimization algorithms and show their optimality (see,
e.g., [23]). However, to the best of our knowledge, there are no results that lower bound
the regret on loss sequences in terms of their individual quadratic variation. A regret
trade-off result was given in [37] for the best expert setting; these authors showed that
                                   √                                       √
a best expert algorithm with O( T ) regret must have a worst case Ω( T ) regret to
any fixed average of experts.



3.2    Non-negative Individual Sequence Regret

Our ultimate goal is to prove strictly positive individual sequence regret lower bounds
for a variety of algorithms. In this section, we will characterize algorithms for which
this goal is achievable, and prove some basic regret lower bounds. This will be done
by considering the larger family of algorithms that have non-negative regret for any
loss sequence. This family, it turns out, can be characterized exactly, and includes the
38       CHAPTER 3. LOWER BOUNDS ON INDIVIDUAL SEQUENCE REGRET

important class of linear cost Regularized Follow the Leader algorithms.
     We focus on linear forecasters whose vector at time t is determined as xt = g(Lt−1 ),
for 1 ≤ t ≤ T , where g : RN → K ⊂ RN is continuous and K is compact and convex.
                                       P
For such algorithms we can write LA,T = Tt=1 g(Lt−1 ) · (Lt − Lt−1 ).
     A non-negative-regret algorithm satisfies that LA,T ≥ minu∈K {u · (LT − L0 )} for
every L0 , . . . , LT ∈ RN . We point out that we allow both positive and negative losses.
Synonymously, we will also say that g has non-negative regret. Note that if L0 = LT (a
closed cumulative loss path), then for any u ∈ K, it holds that u·(LT −L0 ) = 0, and non-
                              P
negative regret implies that Tt=1 g(Lt−1 ) · (Lt − Lt−1 ) ≥ 0. The following theorem
gives an exact characterization of non-negative-regret forecasters as the gradients of
concave potentials. This theorem is highly similar to Theorem 24.8 in [77], which
regards cyclically monotone mappings.

Theorem 3.1. A linear forecaster based on a continuous function g has individual
sequence non-negative regret iff there exists a concave potential function Φ : RN → R
s.t. g = ∇Φ.

Proof. Let g have non-negative regret. For any path γ : [0, 1] → RN with finite length,
             R P
we denote by γ N  j=1 gj dLj the path integral of the vector field g along γ. For a closed

path γ, we have that

            Z X
              N                      n
                                     X
                      gj dLj = lim         g(γ((i − 1)/n)) · (γ(i/n) − γ((i − 1)/n))
              γ j=1           n→∞
                                     i=1

                           ≥ lim min{u · (γ(1) − γ(0))} = 0 ,
                              n→∞ u∈K


where the inequality is true because g has non-negative regret, and the last equality is
true because γ(1) = γ(0). For the reverse path γr , defined by γr (t) = γ(1 − t), we have
   R P              R PN
− γ N   j=1 gj dLj = γr  j=1 gj dLj ≥ 0, where the inequality is true by the fact that γr
                                          R P
is also a closed path. We thus have that γ N    j=1 gj dLj = 0 for any closed path, and

therefore, g is a conservative vector field. As such, it has a potential function Φ s.t.
g = ∇Φ.
Next, consider the case L0 = L, L1 = L′ ,L2 = L, for some arbitrary L, L′ ∈ RN .
Since g has non-negative regret, we have that 0 ≤ g(L) · (L′ − L) + g(L′ ) · (L − L′ ) =
(g(L)−g(L′ ))· (L′ −L). Therefore, (∇Φ(L)−∇Φ(L′ ))· (L−L′ ) ≤ 0 for any L, L′ ∈ RN ,
which means that Φ is concave (see e.g. [71], Theorem 2.1.3).
3.2. NON-NEGATIVE INDIVIDUAL SEQUENCE REGRET                                                              39

    In the other direction, let L0 , . . . , LT ∈ RN . We have that

    T
    X                                 T
                                      X                                       T
                                                                              X
          g(Lt−1 ) · (Lt − Lt−1 ) =         ∇Φ(Lt−1 ) · (Lt − Lt−1 ) ≥              (Φ(Lt ) − Φ(Lt−1 ))
    t=1                               t=1                                     t=1

                                 = Φ(LT ) − Φ(L0 ) ≥ ∇Φ(LT ) · (LT − L0 )

                                 ≥ min{u · (LT − L0 )} ,
                                      u∈K


where the first two inequalities are by the concavity of Φ.




    As a by-product of the proof, we get the following:



Corollary 3.2. If algorithm A uses a non-negative-regret function g(L) = ∇Φ(L),
then it holds that RA,T ≥ Φ(LT ) − Φ(L0 ) − minu∈K {u · (LT − L0 )} ≥ 0.



    If Φ is continuously twice-differentiable, its second order Taylor expansion may be
used to derive a similar lower bound, which now includes a non-negative quadratic
regret term.



Theorem 3.3. Let A be an algorithm using a non-negative-regret function g =
∇Φ, and let L0 , . . . , LT ∈ RN . If Φ is continuously twice-differentiable on the set
conv({L0 , . . . , LT }), then

                                                                              T
                                                           1X ⊤ 2
            RA,T = Φ(LT ) − Φ(L0 ) − min{u · (LT − L0 )} −   lt ∇ Φ(zt )lt ,
                                     u∈K                   2
                                                                           t=1


where zt ∈ [Lt−1 , Lt ].



Proof. For every 1 ≤ t ≤ T , we have Φ(Lt )−Φ(Lt−1 ) = ∇Φ(Lt−1 )·lt +(1/2)l⊤  2
                                                                           t ∇ Φ(zt )lt

for some zt ∈ [Lt−1 , Lt ]. Summing over 1 ≤ t ≤ T , we get

                                        T
                                        X                             T
                                                               1X ⊤ 2
                  Φ(LT ) − Φ(L0 ) =           ∇Φ(Lt−1 ) · lt +   lt ∇ Φ(zt )lt
                                                               2
                                        t=1                          t=1
                                                      T
                                                      X
                                                  1
                                      = LA,T +              l⊤  2
                                                             t ∇ Φ(zt )lt .
                                                  2
                                                      t=1
40       CHAPTER 3. LOWER BOUNDS ON INDIVIDUAL SEQUENCE REGRET

Therefore,


           RA,T = LA,T − min{u · (LT − L0 )}
                          u∈K
                                                                T
                                                             1X ⊤ 2
                = Φ(LT ) − Φ(L0 ) − min{u · (LT − L0 )} −      lt ∇ Φ(zt )lt .
                                      u∈K                    2
                                                               t=1




     Note that the regret is the sum of two non-negative terms. We will sometimes refer
to the first one, Φ(LT ) − Φ(L0 ) − minu∈K {u · (LT − L0 )}, as the first order regret term,
                         P
and to the second, − 21 Tt=1 l⊤    2
                              t ∇ Φ(zt )lt , as the second order regret term. The second

order term is non-negative by the concavity of Φ. These two terms play a key role in
our bounds.


3.2.1     Relation to Regularized Follow the Leader

The class of concave potential algorithms contains the important class of linear cost
Regularized Follow the Leader algorithms. The linear forecaster RF T L(η, R) deter-
mines its weights according to the rule xt+1 = g(Lt ) = arg minx∈K {x · Lt + R(x)/η}.
Following [47], we will assume that R is both strongly convex and continuously twice-
differentiable. The next theorem shows that linear RFTL is a concave potential algo-
rithm, with a potential function that is directly related to the convex conjugate of the
regularizing function. These are known properties (see, e.g., Lemma 15 in [81]), and a
proof, which uses basic calculus, is given in Section 3.5 for completeness.

Theorem 3.4. If R : K → R is continuous and strongly convex and η > 0, then Φ(L) =
(−1/η)R∗ (−ηL) is concave and continuously differentiable on RN , and for every L ∈
RN , it holds that ∇Φ(L) = arg minx∈K {x · L + R(x)/η} and Φ(L) = minx∈K {x · L +
R(x)/η}.

     It is now possible to lower bound the regret of RF T L(η, R) by applying the lower
bounds of Corollary 3.2 and Theorem 3.3.

Theorem 3.5. The regret of RF T L(η, R) satisfies
                                                                        
                        1
        RRF T L(η,R),T ≥ (R(xT +1 ) − R(x1 )) + xT +1 · LT − min{u · LT } ≥ 0 ,
                        η                                    u∈K
3.2. NON-NEGATIVE INDIVIDUAL SEQUENCE REGRET                                           41

and if R∗ is continuously twice-differentiable on conv({−ηL0 , . . . , −ηLT }), then
                                                                        
                        1
        RRF T L(η,R),T ≥ (R(xT +1 ) − R(x1 )) + xT +1 · LT − min{u · LT } +
                        η                                    u∈K
                             T
                           ηX ⊤ 2 ∗
                             lt ∇ R (−ηzt )lt ≥ 0 ,
                           2
                            t=1


where zt ∈ [Lt−1 , Lt ].

Proof. Let Φ be the potential function of RF T L(η, R) according to Theorem 3.4. We
have that Φ(Lt ) = xt+1 · Lt + R(xt+1 )/η and xt+1 = ∇Φ(Lt ) for every t. Therefore,

                                            1                       1
              Φ(LT ) − Φ(L0 ) = xT +1 · LT + R(xT +1 ) − x1 · L0 − R(x1 )
                                            η                       η
                                1
                              = (R(xT +1 ) − R(x1 )) + xT +1 · LT ,
                                η

where we used the fact that L0 = 0. Therefore,


      RRF T L(η,R),T ≥ Φ(LT ) − Φ(L0 ) − min{u · LT }
                                         u∈K
                                                                      
                       1
                     = (R(xT +1 ) − R(x1 )) + xT +1 · LT − min{u · LT } ≥ 0 ,
                       η                                   u∈K


where the first inequality is by Corollary 3.2, and the second inequality is by the fact
that x1 = arg minu∈K {R(u)} and xT +1 ∈ K. This concludes the first part of the proof.
    By Theorem 3.4, Φ(L) = −(1/η)R∗ (−ηL).              Thus, Φ is continuously twice-
differentiable on conv({L0 , . . . , LT }), and we have ∇2 Φ(L) = −η∇2 R∗ (−ηL). By the
first part and by Theorem 3.3, for some zt ∈ [Lt−1 , Lt ],

                                                                      T
                                                                  1X ⊤ 2
      RRF T L(η,R),T = Φ(LT ) − Φ(L0 ) − min{u · (LT − L0 )} −      lt ∇ Φ(zt )lt
                                          u∈K                     2
                                                                    t=1
                       1
                      = (R(xT +1 ) − R(x1 )) + xT +1 · LT − min{u · LT }
                       η                                    u∈K
                           T
                         ηX ⊤ 2 ∗
                       +     lt ∇ R (−ηzt )lt .
                         2
                             t=1




    Note that the first order regret term is split into two new non-negative terms,
namely, (R(xT +1 ) − R(x1 )) /η, and xT +1 · LT − minu∈K {u · LT }.
    The first order regret lower bound given in Theorem 3.5 may be proved directly by
42       CHAPTER 3. LOWER BOUNDS ON INDIVIDUAL SEQUENCE REGRET

extending the “follow the leader, be the leader” (FTL-BTL) lemma ([59], see also [47]).
The extension and proof are given in Subsection 3.5.1.




3.3      Strictly Positive Individual Sequence Anytime Regret

In this section we give lower bounds on the anytime regret for two classes of potentials.
These are the class of potentials with negative definite Hessians, and a rich class of best
expert potentials that includes Hedge.

     We start by describing our general argument, which is based on the lower bounds of
Theorem 3.3 and Corollary 3.2. Note first that these bounds hold for any 1 ≤ T ′ ≤ T .
Now, let C be some convex set on which Φ is continuously twice-differentiable. If
L0 , . . . , LT ∈ C, then we may lower bound the regret by the second order term of
Theorem 3.3, and further lower bound that term over any L0 , . . . , LT ∈ C. Otherwise,
there is some 1 ≤ T ′ ≤ T s.t. LT ′ ∈
                                    / C, and we may lower bound the regret at time
T ′ by the first order term, using Corollary 3.2. We further lower bound that term over
any LT ′ ∈
         / C. The minimum of those two lower bounds gives a lower bound on the
anytime regret. By choosing C properly, we will be able to prove that these two lower
bounds are strictly positive.

     We now present our analysis in more detail. Observe that for every η > 0 and
concave potential Φ : RN → R, Φη (L) = (1/η)Φ(ηL) is also concave, with ∇Φη (L) =
∇Φ(ηL). Let k · k be a non-trivial seminorm on RN . In addition, let a > 0 be such
that Φ is continuously twice-differentiable on the set {kLk ≤ a}, and let L0 = 0.

     Suppose algorithm A uses Φη and encounters the loss path L0 , . . . , LT . If there is
some T ′ s.t. kLT ′ k > a/η, then applying Corollary 3.2 to Φη , we get
                                                                       
                              1
                     RA,T ′ ≥         Φ(ηLT ′ ) − Φ(0) − min{u · ηLT ′ } .
                              η                         u∈K


Defining ρ1 (a) = inf kLk≥a {Φ(L)−Φ(0)−minu∈K {u·L}}, we have that RA,T ′ ≥ ρ1 (a)/η.

     We next assume that kLt k ≤ a/η for every t.              It is easily verified that the
set {kLk ≤ a/η} is convex, and since it contains Lt for every t, it also contains
conv({L0 , . . . , LT }). This means that Φη (L) = (1/η)Φ(ηL) is continuously twice-
differentiable on conv({L0 , . . . , LT }). Applying Theorem 3.3 to Φη and dropping the
3.3. STRICTLY POSITIVE INDIVIDUAL SEQUENCE ANYTIME REGRET                                       43

non-negative first order term, we have

                               T                         T
                             1X ⊤ 2                ηX ⊤ 2
                 RA,T ≥ −      lt ∇ Φη (zt )lt = −   lt ∇ Φ(ηzt )lt ,
                             2                     2
                              t=1                        t=1


where zt ∈ [Lt−1 , Lt ]. We now define ρ2 (a) = inf kLk≤a,klk=1 {−l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l}. If klt k =
                                                                                         6 0,
then


          −l⊤  2                        ⊤ 2                       2             2
            t ∇ Φ(ηzt )lt = −(lt /klt k) ∇ Φ(ηzt )(lt /klt k)klt k ≥ ρ2 (a)klt k ,



where we used the fact that kηzt k ≤ a, which holds since zt ∈ conv({L0 , . . . , LT }).
Otherwise, −l⊤  2                           2
             t ∇ Φ(ηzt )lt ≥ 0 = ρ2 (a)klt k , so in any case,


                       T                         T                             T
                     ηX ⊤ 2             ηX               η       X
          RA,T ≥ −     lt ∇ Φ(ηzt )lt ≥    ρ2 (a)klt k2 = ρ2 (a)   klt k2 .
                     2                  2                2
                       t=1                      t=1                            t=1


Thus, we have


                                                                       PT
Lemma 3.6. If kLt k ≤ a/η for every t, then RA,T ≥ η2 ρ2 (a)                        2
                                                                           t=1 klt k .   Otherwise,
for any t s.t. kLt k > a/η, RA,t ≥ ρ1 (a)/η. Therefore,

                                         (                     T
                                                                       )
                                             ρ1 (a) η       X
                     max{RA,t } ≥ min              , ρ2 (a)   klt k2       .
                       t                       η    2
                                                             t=1



   Note that ρ1 (a) is non-decreasing, ρ2 (a) is non-increasing, and ρ1 (a), ρ2 (a) ≥ 0.
Lemma 3.6 therefore highlights a trade-off in the choice of a.

   It still remains to bound ρ1 and ρ2 away from zero, and that will be done in two
different ways for the cases of negative definite Hessians and best expert potentials.
Nevertheless, the next technical lemma, which is instrumental in bounding ρ1 away
from zero, still holds in general. Essentially, it says that in the definition of ρ1 (a), it
suffices to take the infimum over {kLk = a} instead of {kLk ≥ a}.



Lemma 3.7. It holds that ρ1 (a) = inf kLk=a {Φ(L) − Φ(0) − minu∈K {u · L}}.



Proof. Let kLk ≥ a, and define L′ = aL/kLk, so kL′ k = a. Since Φ is concave, we have
44     CHAPTER 3. LOWER BOUNDS ON INDIVIDUAL SEQUENCE REGRET

that Φ(L) ≥ Φ(L′ ) + ∇Φ(L)(L − L′ ), and thus


       Φ(L) − min{u · L} ≥ Φ(L′ ) + ∇Φ(L) · (L − L′ ) − min{u · L}
              u∈K                                       u∈K
                                            
                                      kLk                    kLk
                         ≥ Φ(L′ ) +       − 1 ∇Φ(L) · L′ −        min{u · L′ }
                                       a                       a u∈K
                              = Φ(L′ ) − min{u · L′ }
                                         u∈K
                                                                    
                                    kLk                  ′           ′
                                +        −1     ∇Φ(L) · L − min{u · L }
                                      a                     u∈K

                              ≥ Φ(L′ ) − min{u · L′ } ,
                                           u∈K


where the last inequality uses the fact that ∇Φ(L)·L′ −minu∈K {u·L′ } ≥ 0. Subtracting
Φ(0), the result follows.


   We now present the main result of this section, assuming we have shown ρ1 , ρ2 > 0.
                                                      P
In what follows we denote QT = QT (l1 , . . . , lT ) = Tt=1 klt k2 for the generic quadratic
variation w.r.t. the seminorm k·k (not to be confused with specific notions of quadratic
variation). We denote Q > 0 for a given lower bound on QT .

Theorem 3.8. Let a > 0 satisfy ρ1 (a), ρ2 (a) > 0.
                                                                                       q
  (i) For every η > 0, maxt {RA,t } ≥ min{ ρ1η(a) , η2 ρ2 (a)Q}, and for η =               2ρ1 (a)
                                                                                           ρ2 (a)Q ,


                                                 p                p
                                 max{RA,t } ≥     ρ1 (a)ρ2 (a)/2 · Q .
                                   t


                                                                           √
 (ii) If for any sequence with quadratic variation QT ≤ Q′ we have RA,T ≤ c Q′ , then
      for any such sequence,

                                                     ρ1 (a)ρ2 (a) QT
                                   max{RA,t } ≥                  ·√ ′ .
                                       t                  2c       Q
                                                           √
      In particular, if QT = Θ(Q′ ), then maxt {RA,t } = Ω( QT ).

Proof. (i) By Lemma 3.6,
                             (                   T
                                                           )                                
                                 ρ1 (a) η       X                          ρ1 (a) η
       max{RA,t } ≥ min                , ρ2 (a)   klt k2       ≥ min             , ρ2 (a)Q       .
         t                         η    2                                    η    2
                                                 t=1

              q                                                 q
                  2ρ1 (a)              ρ1 (a)
Picking η =       ρ2 (a)Q implies that   η    = η2 ρ2 (a)Q =        1
                                                                    2 Qρ1 (a)ρ2 (a).
3.3. STRICTLY POSITIVE INDIVIDUAL SEQUENCE ANYTIME REGRET                                       45

      (ii) Given a and η, let 0 < ǫ < a/η satisfy that T = Q′ /ǫ2 is an integer. In addition,
let x ∈ RN be such that kxk = 1. The loss sequence lt = (−1)t+1 ǫx, for 1 ≤ t ≤ T ,
satisfies that QT = ǫ2 T = Q′ and that kLt k = k(1 − (−1)t )ǫx/2k ≤ ǫ < a/η for every
t. Therefore,

                         p                  T
                                            X
                                    η                 η
                           ′
                        c Q ≥ RA,T ≥ ρ2 (a)   klt k2 = ρ2 (a)Q′ ,
                                    2                 2
                                                    t=1

                                                                               2c√
where the second inequality is by Lemma 3.6. This implies that η ≤ ρ (a)          Q′
                                                                                     .
                                                                            2
                                       2             p
    On the other hand, let T > η2aQ′ , define ǫ = Q′ /T , and consider the loss sequence
                                                        √
lt = ǫx. Then QT = ǫ2 T = Q′ , and kLT k = ǫT = Q′ T > a/η. Thus, again using
                       √
Lemma 3.6, we have c Q′ ≥ RA,T ≥ ρ1 (a)/η, which means that η ≥ cρ√      1 (a)
                                                                            Q′
                                                                               . Together, we
                                                      p
have that cρ√
            1 (a)
               Q′
                            2c√
                  ≤ η ≤ ρ (a)   Q′
                                   , implying that c ≥ ρ1 (a)ρ2 (a)/2.1 Given any sequence
                      2
                                                      √ ′
with QT ≤ Q , we have that ρ1η(a) ≥ ρ1 (a)ρ2c
            ′                                    2 (a) Q
                                                          and η2 ρ2 (a)QT ≥ ρ1 (a)ρ
                                                                                  √ 2 (a)QT
                                                                                2c Q′
                                                                                            , so by
                          ρ1 (a)ρ2 (a)   Q
Lemma 3.6, maxt {RA,t } ≥      2c      · √QT ′ , concluding the proof.


3.3.1      Potentials with Negative Definite Hessians

For this case, we pick k · k2 as our seminorm. Let a > 0 and let ∇2 Φ(L) ≺ 0 for L s.t.
kLk2 ≤ a. In this setting, the infimum in the definitions of ρ1 (a) and ρ2 (a) is equivalent
to a minimum, using continuity and the compactness of L2 balls and spheres.

Lemma 3.9. If k · k = k · k2 , then ρ1 (a) = min kLk=a {Φ(L) − Φ(0) − minu∈K {u · L}}
and ρ2 (a) = min kLk≤a,klk=1 {−l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l}.

Proof. By Lemma 3.7, ρ1 (a) = inf kLk=a {Φ(L) − Φ(0) − minu∈K {u · L}}. The function
h(L) = minu∈K {u · L} is continuous on RN (Lemma 3.20). Therefore, Φ(L) − Φ(0) −
minu∈K {u · L} is continuous on the compact set {kLk = a} and attains a minimum
there. The second statement follows from the fact that −l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l is a continuous
function on the compact set {kLk ≤ a} × {klk = 1}, and attains a minimum there.


      By Lemma 3.9, ρ2 (a) = min kLk≤a,klk=1 {−l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l} > 0, where the inequality is
true since the Hessians are negative definite, so we are taking the minimum of positive
values. In addition, if L 6= 0, then Φ(L) − Φ(0) − minu∈K {u · L} > ∇Φ(L) · L −
minu∈K {u · L} ≥ 0, since Φ is strictly concave. Thus, again by Lemma 3.9, ρ1 (a) =
  1                                                                     √          p
      Note that this means we cannot guarantee a regret upper bound of c Q′ for c < ρ1 (a)ρ2 (a)/2.
46         CHAPTER 3. LOWER BOUNDS ON INDIVIDUAL SEQUENCE REGRET

min kLk=a {Φ(L) − Φ(0) − minu∈K {u · L}} > 0. The following statement is an immediate
consequence of Theorem 3.8:

Theorem 3.10. If ∇2 Φ(L) ≺ 0 for every L s.t. kLk2 ≤ a, for some a > 0, then

  (i) For every η > 0, it holds that maxt {RA,t } ≥ min{ ρ1η(a) , η2 ρ2 (a)Q}, and for η =
      q                            p                √
        2ρ1 (a)
        ρ2 (a)Q , max t {R A,t } ≥  ρ1 (a)ρ2 (a)/2 · Q.

                                                                           √
 (ii) If for any sequence with quadratic variation QT ≤ Q′ we have RA,T ≤ c Q′ ,
       then for any such sequence,    maxt {RA,t } ≥ ρ1 (a)ρ
                                                          2c
                                                             2 (a)
                                                                   · √QQT ′ . In particular, if
                                          √
       QT = Θ(Q′ ), then maxt {RA,t } = Ω( QT ).


3.3.2      The Best Expert Setting

In the best expert setting, where K = ∆N , potentials can never be strictly concave,
let alone have negative definite Hessians. To see that, let L ∈ RN , c ∈ R, and define
L′ = L + c · 1, where 1 is the all-one vector. We will say that L′ is a uniform translation
of L. Then


                c = ∇Φ(L) · (L′ − L) ≥ Φ(L′ ) − Φ(L) ≥ ∇Φ(L′ ) · (L′ − L) = c ,


where we use the concavity of Φ, the fact that ∇Φ is a probability vector, and the fact
that L′ − L = c · 1. For a strictly concave Φ, the above inequalities would be strict if
c 6= 0, but instead, they are equalities. Thus, the conditions for strict concavity are not
fulfilled at any point L.
     We will replace the negative definite assumption with the assumption that for every
            2
i 6= j, ∂L∂i ∂L
             Φ
                j
                  > 0. This condition is natural for regret minimization algorithms, because
∂ 2 Φ(L)
∂Li ∂Lj    = ∂p∂L
                i (L)
                   j
                      , where pi is the weight of expert i. Thus, we simply require that
an increase in the cumulative loss of expert j results in an increase in the weight of
every other expert (and hence a decrease in its own weight). A direct implication
of this assumption is that ∂Φ(L)
                             ∂Li > 0 for every i and L. To see that, observe that
             P                           P    ∂pj (L)
pi (L) = 1 − j6=i pj (L), so ∂p∂L
                                i (L)
                                   i
                                      = − j6=i ∂L  i
                                                      < 0. Since pi (L) ≥ 0 and it is
strictly decreasing in Li , it follows that pi (L) > 0, or ∂Φ(L)
                                                            ∂Li > 0.

     Using the above assumption we proceed to bound ρ1 and ρ2 away from zero. We
first prove some general properties of best expert potentials.
3.3. STRICTLY POSITIVE INDIVIDUAL SEQUENCE ANYTIME REGRET                              47

Lemma 3.11. (i) Every row and column of ∇2 Φ sum up to zero. (ii) Φ(L) − Φ(0) −
minu∈K {u · L} is invariant w.r.t. a uniform translation of L. (iii) l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l is
invariant w.r.t. a uniform translation of either l or L.
                             PN       ∂Φ(L)                                   ∂h(L)
Proof. (i) Defining h(L) =      i=1    ∂Li , we have that h ≡ 1, and thus 0 = ∂Lj       =
PN ∂ 2 Φ(L)
  i=1 ∂Li ∂Lj for every j.

   (ii) Let L′ = L + c · 1. As already seen, Φ(L′ ) − Φ(L) = c, and we also have that


                min{u · L′ } = min{u · L + c · u · 1} = min{u · L} + c .
                 u∈K            u∈K                     u∈K


Therefore,


              Φ(L′ ) − Φ(0) − min{u · L′ } = Φ(L) − Φ(0) − min{u · L} .
                               u∈K                            u∈K


   (iii) Note that in this context, l, L ∈ RN are unrelated vectors.


    (l + c1)⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)(l + c1) = l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l + c1⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)(l + c1) + l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)(c1)

                               = l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l ,


where we have that 1⊤ ∇2 Φ(L) = 0⊤ and ∇2 Φ(L)1 = 0 by (i). To show the invariance
for L, recall that for L′ = L+c·1, Φ(L′ )−Φ(L) = c, and thus, ∇2 Φ(L′ ) = ∇2 Φ(L).

   We now consider ρ1 (a) and ρ2 (a) where we use the seminorm kvk = δ(v). (The
fact that δ(v) = maxi {vi } − mini {vi } is a seminorm is proved in Lemma 3.21 in Section
                               P
3.5.) Under this seminorm, Tt=1 klt k2 becomes qT , the relative quadratic variation.
Note that δ(v) is invariant to uniform translation. In particular, for every v ∈ RN we
may consider its “normalized” version, v̂ = v − mini {vi } · 1. We have that δ(v̂) = δ(v),
v̂ ∈ [0, δ(v)]N , and there exist entries i and j s.t. v̂i = 0 and v̂j = δ(v). Denoting
N (a) for the set of normalized vectors with seminorm a, we thus have that N (a) =
{v ∈ [0, a]N : ∃i, j s.t. vi = a, vj = 0}. The set N (a) is bounded and also closed, as a
finite union and intersection of closed sets.
   Using invariance to uniform translation, we can now show that the infima in the
expressions for ρ1 and ρ2 may be taken over compact sets, and thus be replaced with
                                          2
minima. Using the requirement that ∂L∂i ∂L
                                        Φ
                                           j
                                             > 0 for every i 6= j, we can then show that
the expressions inside the minima are positive. This is summarized in the next lemma.
48      CHAPTER 3. LOWER BOUNDS ON INDIVIDUAL SEQUENCE REGRET

Lemma 3.12. For the best expert setting, it holds that ρ1 (a) = min L∈N (a) {Φ(L)} −
Φ(0) > 0 and ρ2 (a) = min L∈[0,a]N ,l∈N (1) {−l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l} > 0.




Proof. We start with ρ1 (a). By Lemma 3.7, we have that ρ1 (a) = inf kLk=a {Φ(L) −
Φ(0) − minu∈K {u · L}}. By part (ii) of Lemma 3.11, Φ(L) − Φ(0) − minu∈K {u · L} is in-
variant to uniform translation, so ρ1 (a) = inf L∈N (a) {Φ(L)−Φ(0)−minu∈K {u·L}}. For
every normalized vector L, minu∈K {u·L} = 0, by placing all the weight of u on the zero
entry of L. In addition, as already observed, Φ(L)−Φ(0)−minu∈K {u·L} is continuous,
and by the compactness of N (a), ρ1 (a) = min L∈N (a) {Φ(L) − Φ(0) − minu∈K {u · L}} =
                                                              P
min L∈N (a) {Φ(L) − Φ(0)}. Now, Φ(L) − Φ(0) ≥ ∇Φ(L) · L = N     i=1 pi (L)Li by the con-

cavity of Φ. Recall that pi (L) > 0, and for L ∈ N (a), we have that Li ≥ 0 for every
i, and there is at least one index with Li > 0. Thus, Φ(L) − Φ(0) > 0, proving the
statement for ρ1 .


     We now move on to ρ2 .      By Lemma 3.11, −l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l is invariant to a uni-
form translation of either l or L. Therefore, ρ2 (a) = inf L∈[0,a]N ,l∈N (1) {−l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l}.
Since −l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l is continuous on the compact set [0, a]N × N (1), ρ2 (a) =
min L∈[0,a]N ,l∈N (1) {−l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l}. To show that ρ2 (a) > 0, it therefore suffices to
show that −l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l > 0 for every L ∈ [0, a]N and l ∈ N (1). Fix L, and de-
note A = −∇2 Φ(L). For any l ∈ N (1), one entry is 1, another is 0, and the rest are in
[0, 1]. If N = 2, we have that −l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l is either −∇2 Φ(L)1,1 or −∇2 Φ(L)2,2 , and
                                                                          P
in both cases positive. We next assume N ≥ 3 and minimize f (l)= l⊤ Al = i,j ai,j li lj
for lk ∈ [0, 1], k ≥ 3, where l1 = 1, l2 = 0. For every k,

                     ∂f                 X             X
                         = 2ak,k lk + 2   ai,k li = 2   ai,k (li − lk ) ,
                     ∂lk
                                        i6=k           i6=k


where the last equality is by part (i) of Lemma 3.11. Note that ai,k < 0 if i 6= k and
                            ∂f                        ∂f                               ∂f
ak,k > 0. Thus, for lk = 0, ∂l k
                                 < 0, and for lk = 1, ∂l k
                                                           > 0, so by the linearity of ∂l k
                                                                                            ,
                                 ∂f
there is lk∗ ∈ [0, 1] satisfying ∂l k
                                      = 0, and it is a minimizing choice for f . Thus, at a
                                    ∂f         P
minimum point, it holds that ∂l       k
                                        = 0, or i6=k ai,k li = −ak,k lk for every k ≥ 3. We
3.4. APPLICATION TO SPECIFIC REGRET MINIMIZATION ALGORITHMS 49

have that

                N
                X                   N X
                                    X                         N
                                                              X                   2
                                                                                  X    X           N
                                                                                                   X    X
      f (l) =          ai,i li2 +              ai,j li lj =          ai,i li2 +     li   ai,j lj +   li   ai,j lj
                i=1                 i=1 j6=i                   i=1                i=1      j6=i                i=3       j6=i
                N
                X                   X                  N
                                                       X                          N
                                                                                  X                  X                   N
                                                                                                                         X
           =           ai,i li2 +          a1,j lj +         li (−ai,i li ) =           ai,i li2 +          a1,j lj −           ai,i li2
                i=1                 j6=1               i=3                        i=1                j6=1                i=3
                2
                X                   X                            X                       X                  X
           =           ai,i li2 +          a1,j lj = a1,1 +             a1,j lj = −             a1,j +             a1,j lj
                i=1                 j6=1                         j6=1                    j6=1               j6=1
                X
           =           a1,j (lj − 1) ≥ a1,2 (l2 − 1) = −a1,2 .
                j6=1


Since our choice of l1 = 1 and l2 = 0 was arbitrary, we have that f (l) ≥ mini6=j {−ai,j } >
0. Thus, −l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l >0, completing the proof.


   We can now apply Theorem 3.8 to the best expert setting.

                                    2
Theorem 3.13. If ∂L∂i ∂L
                      Φ
                         j
                           > 0 for every i 6= j and every L s.t. δ(L) ≤ a, then

  (i) For every η > 0, it holds that maxt {RA,t } ≥ min{ ρ1η(a) , η2 ρ2 (a)q}, and for η =
      q                          p
        2ρ1 (a)                                   √
        ρ2 (a)q , maxt {RA,t } ≥  ρ1 (a)ρ2 (a)/2 · q.

 (ii) If for any sequence with relative quadratic variation qT ≤ q ′ we have RA,T ≤
       √
      c q ′ , then for any such sequence, maxt {RA,t } ≥ ρ1 (a)ρ
                                                              2c
                                                                 2 (a)
                                                                       · √qTq′ . In particular, if
                                          √
      qT = Θ(q ′ ), then maxt {RA,t } = Ω( qT ).



3.4      Application to Specific Regret Minimization Algo-
         rithms

3.4.1     Online Gradient Descent with Linear Costs

In this subsection, we deal with the Lazy Projection variant of the OGD algorithm ([92])
with a fixed learning rate η and linear costs. In this setting, for each t, OGD selects
a weight vector according to the rule xt+1 = arg minx∈K {kx + ηLt k2 }, where K ⊂ RN
is compact and convex. As observed in [49] and [47], this algorithm is equivalent
to RF T L(η, R), where R(x) = 12 kxk22 , namely, setting xt+1 = arg minx∈K {x · Lt +
(1/2η)kxk22 }. In what follows we will make the assumption that K ⊇ B(0, a), where
B(0, a) is the closed ball with radius a centered at 0, for some a > 0.
50      CHAPTER 3. LOWER BOUNDS ON INDIVIDUAL SEQUENCE REGRET

     Note that solving the above minimization problem without the restriction x ∈ K
yields x′t+1 = −ηLt . However, if kLt k2 ≤ a/η, then x′t+1 ∈ K, and then, in fact,
xt+1 = −ηLt . By Theorem 3.4,


           Φη (Lt ) = xt+1 · Lt + (1/η)R(xt+1 ) = −ηLt · Lt + (1/2η)k − ηLt k22

                  = −(η/2)kLt k22 .


Thus, if kLk2 ≤ a, then Φ(L) = −(1/2)kLk22 and also ∇2 Φ(L) = −I, where I is the
identity matrix. By Lemma 3.9,

                     1                            1                  1
     ρ1 (a) = min {− kLk22 − min{u · L}} ≥ min {− kLk22 − (−L) · L} = a2 ,
             kLk2 =a 2       u∈K          kLk2 =a 2                  2

where we used the fact that −L ∈ K if kLk2 = a. In addition, by Lemma 3.9,


                       ρ2 (a) = min kLk2 ≤a,klk2 =1 {−l⊤ (−I)l} = 1 .


By Theorem 3.10, we have that maxt {RA,t } ≥ min{a2 /(2η), (η/2)Q}, and for η = √aQ ,
                 √
maxt {RA,t } ≥ a2 Q.


3.4.2    The Hedge Algorithm

Hedge is the most notable regret minimization algorithm for the expert setting. We
                                                                p   e−ηLi,t
have K = ∆N , and the algorithm gives a weight pi,t+1 = PN i,0            −ηLj,t   to expert i at
                                                                j=1 j,0 e
                                                                   p
time t + 1, where the initial weights pi,0 and the learning rate η are parameters, and
PN
  i=1 pi,0 = 1.
                                                               P
   It is easy to see that for the potential Φη (L) = −(1/η) ln( Ni=1 pi,0 e
                                                                            −ηLi ), we have


that p = (p1 , . . . , pN ) = ∇Φη (L). The Hessian ∇2 Φη has the following simple form:

Lemma 3.14. Let L ∈ RN and denote p = ∇Φη (L). Then ∇2 Φη (L) = η · (pp⊤ −
diag(p))  0, where diag(p) is the diagonal matrix with p as its diagonal.

     The proof is given in Section 3.5. We will assume p1,0 = . . . = pN,0 = 1/N ,
and write Hed(η) for Hedge with parameters η and the uniform distribution. Thus,
                  P       −Li ), and we have by Lemma 3.14 that ∂ 2 Φ > 0 for every
Φ(L) = − ln((1/N ) Ni=1 e                                      ∂Li ∂Lj

i 6= j. Therefore, by Lemma 3.12, ρ1 , ρ2 > 0. We now need to calculate ρ1 and ρ2 .
This is straightforward in the case of ρ1 , but for ρ2 we give the value only for N = 2.
3.4. APPLICATION TO SPECIFIC REGRET MINIMIZATION ALGORITHMS 51

                                          N
Lemma 3.15. For any N ≥ 2, ρ1 (a) = ln N −1+e −a . For N = 2, it holds that ρ2 (a) =
               −2
 ea/2 + e−a/2      .

Proof. By Lemma 3.12,
                                                                            (     N
                                                                                          )
                                                                                1 X −Li
     ρ1 (a) = min {Φ(L)} − Φ(0) = min {Φ(L)} = − ln max                            e
              L∈N (a)                    L∈N (a)                  L∈N (a)       N
                                                                                 i=1
                                               
                        1                                    N
           = − ln         ((N − 1)e−0 + e−a )       = ln             .
                        N                                N − 1 + e−a

In addition, ρ2 (a) = min L∈[0,a]N ,l∈N (1) {−l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l} > 0. For N = 2, we have N (1) =
{(1, 0), (0, 1)}. Therefore, −l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l is either −∇2 Φ(L)1,1 or −∇2 Φ(L)2,2 . Denoting
p = p(L) = ∇Φ(L), we have that −∇2 Φ(L)1,1 = p1 − p21 and −∇2 Φ(L)2,2 = p2 − p22 by
Lemma 3.14. Since p1 = 1 − p2 , we have p1 − p21 = p2 − p22 . Now,

                         e−L1             e−L2            −(L1 +L2 )   −L1
                                                                                  
                                                                               −L2 −2
        p1 (1 − p1 ) =              ·                =  e            e     + e
                     e−L1 + e−L2 e−L1 + e−L2
                                                 −2
                    = e(L2 −L1 )/2 + e(L1 −L2 )/2     .


The function (ex + e−x )−2 is decreasing for x ≥ 0, so the smallest value is attained for
|L1 − L2 | = a. Thus, for N = 2, ρ2 (a) = (ea/2 + e−a/2 )−2 .


   Picking a = 1.2, we have by Theorem 3.13 that

Theorem 3.16. For N = 2, there exists η s.t.

                                         p                       √
                    max{RHed(η),t } ≥     ρ1 (a)ρ2 (a)q/2 ≥ 0.195 q .
                         t


   For a general N we may still lower bound maxt {RHed(η),t } by providing a lower
bound for ρ2 (a). We use the fact that the term −l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l, which is minimized in
the definition of ρ2 (a), may be interpreted as the variance of a certain discrete and
bounded random variable. Thus, the key element that will be used is a general lower
bound on the variance of such variables. This bound, possibly of separate interest, is
given in the following lemma, whose proof can be found in Section 3.5.

                                                                            PN
Lemma 3.17. Let x1 < . . . < xN ∈ R, 0 < p1 , . . . , pN < 1, and                k=1 pk = 1, and

let X be a random variable that obtains the value xk with probability pk , for every
                                                                pp
                                                        i j
1 ≤ k ≤ N . Then for every 1 ≤ i < j ≤ N , V ar(X) ≥ pi +p  j
                                                              · (xi − xj )2 , and equality
52      CHAPTER 3. LOWER BOUNDS ON INDIVIDUAL SEQUENCE REGRET

is attained iff N = 2, or N = 3 with i = 1, j = 3, and x2 = p1 xp11 +p
                                                                    +p3 x3
                                                                       3
                                                                           . In particular,
V ar(X) ≥ pp11+p
               pN
                 N
                   · (xN − x1 )2 ≥ 12 mink {pk }(xN − x1 )2 .

     We comment that for the special case p1 = . . . = pN = 1/N , Lemma 3.17 yields the
inequality V ar(X) ≥ (xN − x1 )2 /(2N ), sometimes referred to as the Szőkefalvi Nagy
inequality [88].
     We now proceed to lower bound ρ2 (a) for any N .

                                                       1
Lemma 3.18. For any N ≥ 2, it holds that ρ2 (a) ≥ 2(N −1)e a +2 .



Proof. Recall that ρ2 (a) = min L∈[0,a]N ,l∈N (1) {−l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l}.                By Lemma 3.14,
∇2 Φ(L) = pp⊤ − diag(p), where p = p(L) = ∇Φ(L), and thus,

                                                        N                N
                                                                                        !2
                                                        X                X
               ⊤    2          ⊤             ⊤    ⊤
             −l ∇ Φ(L)l = l diag(p)l − l pp l =               pi li2 −         pi l i        .
                                                        i=1              i=1


Assume for now that l1 , . . . , lN are distinct. Then −l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l = V ar(X), where
X is a random variable obtaining the value li with probability pi , i = 1, . . . , N . By
Lemma 3.17, V ar(X) ≥ 12 mink {pk }(maxi {li } − mini {li })2 . For l ∈ N (1) it holds
that maxi {li } = 1 and mini {li } = 0. In addition, for L ∈ [0, a]N , the smallest value
for mink {pk } is obtained when one entry of L is a and the rest are 0, yielding that
                e  −a                                       1      e           −a
                                                                                1
mink {pk } ≥ N −1+e                              ⊤ 2
                    −a . Together we have that −l ∇ Φ(L)l ≥ 2 · N −1+e−a = 2(N −1)ea +2 .


Since the expression −l⊤ ∇2 Φ(L)l is continuous in l, this inequality holds even if the
assumption that the entries of l are distinct numbers is dropped. The result follows.

Theorem 3.19. For any 0 < α < 1/N and η > 0, it holds that maxt {RHed(η),t } ≥
                                                               q
min{ η1 ln( NN(1−α)
                −1  ), 1
                       4 ηαq}, and  for α =    1/(2N ) and η =            2N −1
                                                                (8N/q) ln 2N −2 ,
                        √   q
                          q    2N       √
maxt {RHed(η),t } ≥ 4N · 2N     −1 = Ω( q/N ).

Proof. By Theorem 3.13, for every η > 0, it holds that maxt {RHed(η),t } ≥
min{ ρ1η(a) , η2 ρ2 (a)q}. We fix a, observing that any a ∈ (0, ∞) may be used, and denote
         1
α = (N −1)e a +1 . Note that α may thus obtain any value in (0, 1/N ). By Lemma 3.18,

                                                         N
we have that ρ2 (a) ≥ α/2. By Lemma 3.15, ρ1 (a) = ln N −1+e −a , and since



         N (1 − α)    N      (N − 1)ea        N ea           N
                   =      ·             =              =             ,
          N −1                     a
                     N − 1 (N − 1)e + 1           a
                                          (N − 1)e + 1   N − 1 + e−a

we have that ρ1 (a) = ln NN(1−α)                                 1   N (1−α) 1
                                           t {RHed(η),t } ≥ min{ η ln N −1 , 4 ηαq}. We
                             −1 . Thus, maxq
                                              4    N (1−α)
may maximize the r.h.s. by picking η =        αq ln N −1 , yielding maxt {RHed(η),t } ≥
3.5. APPENDIX: ADDITIONAL CLAIMS AND MISSING PROOFS                                      53
q
    1      N (1−α)
    4 αq ln N −1 . We may further pick a s.t. α = 1/(2N ) and obtain

                                 r                     s                   
                                      q    N − 1/2          q          1
             max{RHed(η),t } ≥          ln         =          ln 1 +
              t                      8N     N −1           8N        2N − 2
                               v
                               u          1       r
                               u q                   q   1
                             ≥ t    ·   2N −2
                                                =      ·
                                 8N 1 + 2N1−2       8N 2N − 1
                               √ r
                                q      2N
                             =    ·           ,
                               4N     2N − 1

                                                            x
where the second inequality uses the fact that ln(1 + x) ≥ x+1 for x ∈ (−1, ∞).



3.5      Appendix: Additional Claims and Missing Proofs

Lemma 3.20. If K ⊂ RN is compact, then h(L) = minu∈K {u · L} is continuous on
RN .


Proof. First of all, h(L) is well-defined, because for every L ∈ RN , u · L is continuous
and K is compact. Similarly, k·k2 is continuous on K, so D = maxu∈K {kuk2 } is well-
defined. Let L, L′ ∈ RN , and let u, u′ ∈ K satisfy h(L) = u · L and h(L′ ) = u′ · L′ .
Therefore,


              h(L′ ) − h(L) = u′ · L′ − u · L ≤ u · L′ − u · L = u · (L′ − L)

                            ≤ kuk2 · kL′ − Lk2 ≤ DkL′ − Lk2 ,


where the second inequality is by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. Reversing the roles
of L and L′ , we get h(L) − h(L′ ) ≤ DkL − L′ k2 , and together we get |h(L′ ) − h(L)| ≤
DkL − L′ k2 , which means that h is continuous.


Lemma 3.21. It holds that δ : RN → R, δ(v) = maxi {vi } − mini {vi }, is a seminorm.


Proof. Positive homogeneity: if a ≥ 0, then δ(av) = maxi {avi } − mini {avi } =
a maxi {vi } − a mini {vi } = |a|δ(v). Otherwise, δ(av) = maxi {avi } − mini {avi } =
− mini {−avi } + maxi {−avi } = δ(−av), and as already seen, δ(−av) = |a|δ(v).
    Triangle inequality: given u, v ∈ RN , it holds for every j that mini {ui }+mini {vi } ≤
uj + vj ≤ maxi {ui } + maxi {vi }. Thus, maxi {ui + vi } ≤ maxi {ui } + maxi {vi }, and
54      CHAPTER 3. LOWER BOUNDS ON INDIVIDUAL SEQUENCE REGRET

mini {ui } + mini {vi } ≤ mini {ui + vi }. Together we get


                 δ(u + v) = max{ui + vi } − min{ui + vi }
                                i                 i

                           ≤ max{ui } + max{vi } − min{ui } − min{vi }
                                i             i         i          i

                           = δ(u) + δ(v) .




     Proof of Theorem 3.4: We start by observing that


                   (−1/η)R∗ (−ηL) = (−1/η) sup {x · (−ηL) − R(x)}
                                                  x∈K

                                     = inf {x · L + R(x)/η}
                                        x∈K

                                     = min{x · L + R(x)/η} .
                                        x∈K


We used the fact that x · L + R(x)/η is continuous and attains a minimum on a
compact set. Consequently, Φ is defined for every L. Since R∗ is convex, Φ(L) =
(−1/η)R∗ (−ηL) is concave.
     Denote h(u, L) = u · L + R(u)/η, and let L, L′ ∈ RN , where L 6= L′ . In addition,
let x = arg minu∈K {h(u, L)} and x′ = arg minu∈K {h(u, L′ )}, and denote ∆L = L′ − L
and ∆x = x′ − x. We have


           Φ(L′ ) − Φ(L) = h(x′ , L′ ) − h(x, L) ≤ h(x, L′ ) − h(x, L) = x · ∆L ,


where the inequality is by definition of x′ . Reversing the roles of L and L′ , we also
get Φ(L) − Φ(L′ ) ≤ −x′ · ∆L. Therefore, x′ · ∆L ≤ Φ(L′ ) − Φ(L) ≤ x · ∆L, or
∆x · ∆L ≤ Φ(L′ ) − Φ(L) − x · ∆L ≤ 0, implying that


                 |Φ(L′ ) − Φ(L) − x · ∆L| ≤ |∆x · ∆L| ≤ k∆xk2 k∆Lk2 ,


or |Φ(L+∆L)−Φ(L)−x·∆L|
          k∆Lk2        ≤ k∆xk2 . If we showed that lim∆L→0 k∆xk2 = 0, then

                               Φ(L + ∆L) − Φ(L) − x · ∆L
                         lim                             =0,
                        ∆L→0           k∆Lk2

that is, ∇Φ(L) = x, as required. Furthermore, the fact that Φ is differentiable on RN
3.5. APPENDIX: ADDITIONAL CLAIMS AND MISSING PROOFS                                     55

would imply that it is continuously differentiable (see, e.g., Corollary 25.5.1 in [77]).

     Since R is strongly convex (with some parameter α > 0), we have that R( 21 x +
1 ′     1        1    ′    α 1 1         2                                  1     1 ′
2 x ) ≤ 2 R(x) + 2 R(x ) − 2 · 2 · 2 k∆xk2 . Dividing by η and adding L · ( 2 x + 2 x ) to

both sides, we get

                1 x + x′       x + x′     1            1   1
                  R(     )+L·(        )≤    R(x) + L · x + R(x′ )
                η    2           2       2η            2  2η
                                              1 ′    α
                                         + L · x − k∆xk22 ,
                                              2     8η

or

                          x + x′       1         1           α
                     h(          , L) ≤ h(x, L) + h(x′ , L) − k∆xk22 .
                            2          2         2           8η

                              ′
By definition of x, h( x+x
                        2 , L) ≥ h(x, L), so, rearranging, we get


                                                          α
                                  h(x′ , L) − h(x, L) ≥      k∆xk22 .
                                                          4η

Since

                                     1                  1
                 h(x′ , L) = x′ · L + R(x′ ) = x′ · L′ + R(x′ ) − x′ · ∆L
                                     η                  η
                            = h(x′ , L′ ) − x′ · ∆L ≤ h(x, L′ ) − x′ · ∆L ,


we have that

                     α
                        k∆xk22 ≤ h(x, L′ ) − x′ · ∆L − h(x, L)
                     4η
                                   = x · L′ − x′ · ∆L − x · L = −∆x · ∆L

                                   ≤ k∆xk2 k∆Lk2 ,


and thus, k∆xk2 ≤ 4η
                  α k∆Lk2 . Therefore, lim∆L→0 k∆xk2 = 0, completing the proof.




     Proof of Lemma 3.14: We assume w.l.o.g. that pi,0 > 0 for every i. Let 1 ≤ i, j ≤ N .
We have that
                                                   
                   ∂          ∂Φη      ∂ 2 Φη     ∂Φη −1    ∂ 2 Φη −1
                           ln       =         ·          =         p .
                  ∂Li         ∂Lj     ∂Li ∂Lj     ∂Lj      ∂Li ∂Lj j
56      CHAPTER 3. LOWER BOUNDS ON INDIVIDUAL SEQUENCE REGRET

Since
                                                                 !
                    ∂Φη                     pi,0 e−ηLj
                 ln     = ln           PN                             = ln pi,0 − ηLj + ηΦη ,
                    ∂Lj                    k=1 pk,0 e
                                                        −ηLk



we also have that
                                      
                    ∂            ∂Φη              ∂Lj    ∂Φη
                              ln           = −η       +η     = −η · 1i=j + ηpi ,
                   ∂Li           ∂Lj              ∂Li    ∂Li

                  ∂2Φ                                                              ∂2Φ
and therefore, ∂Li ∂Lη j p−1                                           η
                          j = −η · 1i=j + ηpi , or, equivalently, ∂Li ∂Lj = η(pi pj − 1i=j pj ),

as required.
    For any p ∈ ∆N and z ∈ RN , we denote by Xp,z a random variable which satisfies
                  P
P(Xp,z = zi ) = {j:zj =zi } pj for every 1 ≤ i ≤ N . Note that even though the values
                                                              PN
zi are not necessarily distinct, nevertheless, E[Xp,z ] =       i=1 pi zi and V ar(Xp,z ) =
PN         2
                P N         2                                              N
   i=1 pi zi − ( i=1 pi zi ) as usual, by continuity. Thus, for any z ∈ R , we have that


                               N                N
                                                                 !2                       N
                                                                                        N X
                               X                X                                       X
        0 ≤ V ar(Xp,z ) =            pi zi2 −           pi z i        = z⊤ diag(p)z −              pi zi pj zj
                               i=1              i=1                                      i=1 j=1

         = z⊤ diag(p)z − z⊤ pp⊤ z = z⊤ (diag(p) − pp⊤ )z .


We therefore have that diag(p) − pp⊤ = −(1/η)∇2 Φη (L) is positive semi-definite, and
the result follows.
     Proof of Lemma 3.17: Denoting yk = xk − E[X] for 1 ≤ k ≤ N and p = pi p+p
                                                                             i
                                                                               j
                                                                                 , we
have that


            V ar(X) ≥ pi yi2 + pj yj2 ≥ pi yi2 + pj yj2 − (pi + pj )(pyi + (1 − p)yj )2

                        = (pi + pj )(pyi2 + (1 − p)yj2 − (pyi + (1 − p)yj )2 )

                        = (pi + pj )((p − p2 )yi2 + (p − p2 )yj2 − 2(p − p2 )yi yj )
                                                             pi pj
                        = (pi + pj )(p − p2 )(yi − yj )2 =          (yi − yj )2
                                                           pi + pj
                            pi pj
                        =         (xi − xj )2 .
                          pi + pj

To obtain an equality, the first inequality must become an equality, necessitating that
xk = E[X] for every k 6= i, j, and thus, N ≤ 3. If N = 2, the first inequality is an
equality, and pyi + (1 − p)yj = p1 x1 + p2 x2 − E[X] = 0, so the second above inequality
is also an equality. For N = 3, if xk = E[X], then the first inequality becomes an
3.5. APPENDIX: ADDITIONAL CLAIMS AND MISSING PROOFS                                      57

equality, and in addition,

                                pi x i + pj x j          E[X] − pk xk
             pyi + (1 − p)yj =                  − E[X] =              − E[X]
                                   pi + pj                 pi + pj
                                E[X](1 − pk )
                              =                  − E[X] = 0 ,
                                    pi + pj

so the second inequality becomes an equality. Thus, we have an equality iff xk = E[X],
or equivalently, i = 1, k = 2, j = 3, and x2 = p1 x1 + p2 x2 + p3 x3 .
   Finally, we have in particular that

                           p1 pN                      1
             V ar(X) ≥           · (xN − x1 )2 =             · (xN − x1 )2
                         p1 + pN                 1/p1 + 1/pN
                         1
                        ≥ min{pk }(xN − x1 )2 ,
                         2 k

completing the proof.


3.5.1    An Extension of the FTL-BTL Lemma

The upper bound on the regret of the RFTL algorithm relies on the “follow the leader,
be the leader” (FTL-BTL) lemma (see [47]). We extend that lemma to facilitate the
proof of a lower bound as well. The following lemma gives the core inductive argument
of the extension as well as the original, for completeness.

Lemma 3.22. Let X be a non-empty set, let 1 ≤ n ∈ N, and let gi : X → R for
                      P
1 ≤ i ≤ n. Denote Gi = ij=1 gj , and assume Gi has at least one global minimum on
X. Denote xi for such a minimum for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, and let x0 ∈ X be an arbitrary point.
    P                          P
Then nj=1 gj (xj ) ≤ Gn (xn ) ≤ nj=1 gj (xj−1 ).
                                           P
Proof. By induction on n. For n = 1, nj=1 gj (xj ) = G1 (x1 ) ≤ G1 (x0 ) = g 1 (x0 ) =
Pn
  j=1 gj (xj−1 ), where the inequality is by definition of x1 . We assume correctness for

n and proceed to prove for n + 1. We have on the one hand that


                Gn+1 (xn+1 ) ≤ Gn+1 (xn ) = Gn (xn ) + gn+1 (xn )
                                  n
                                  X                                 n+1
                                                                    X
                              ≤         gj (xj−1 ) + gn+1 (xn ) =         gj (xj−1 ) ,
                                  j=1                               j=1


where the first inequality is by definition of xn+1 , and the second one is by the induction
assumption. On the other hand,
58         CHAPTER 3. LOWER BOUNDS ON INDIVIDUAL SEQUENCE REGRET




                Gn+1 (xn+1 ) = Gn (xn+1 ) + gn+1 (xn+1 ) ≥ Gn (xn ) + gn+1 (xn+1 )
                                      n
                                      X                                  n+1
                                                                         X
                                  ≥         gj (xj ) + g n+1 (xn+1 ) =         gj (xj ) ,
                                      j=1                                j=1


where the first inequality is by definition of xn , and the second inequality is by the
induction assumption.



     We now give the extended FTL-BTL lemma. We assume the RFTL setting, so that
K ⊂ RN is non-empty, compact, and convex, R : K → R is strongly convex, and η > 0.


                                                                                                PT
Lemma 3.23. Let lt ∈ RN for 1 ≤ t ≤ T , and let u0 = arg minu∈K {u ·                                 t=1 lt }. Then


                                            T
                                            X
                    RRF T L(η,R),T ≤               lt · (xt − xt+1 ) + (R(u0 ) − R(x1 ))/η
                                             t=1


and

                                                                      T
                                                                      X
               RRF T L(η,R),T ≥ (R(xT +1 ) − R(x1 ))/η +                    lt · (xT +1 − u0 ) ≥ 0 .
                                                                      t=1


Proof. To fit the terminology of Lemma 3.22, set X = K, n = T + 1, g1 (x) = R(x)/η,
                                                                   P
and gt+1 (x) = lt · x for 1 ≤ t ≤ T . Thus, Gt+1 (x) = R(x)/η + x · tτ =1 lτ for 0 ≤ t ≤ T ,
                                           P
and xt+1 = arg minu∈K {R(u)/η + u · tτ =1 lτ }. In addition, we set x0 = x1 . By
Lemma 3.22,

                     T
                     X                                       T
                                                             X                                  T
                                                                                                X
      R(x1 )/η +           lt · xt+1 ≤ R(xT +1 )/η +               lt · xT +1 ≤ R(x1 )/η +            lt · x t ,
                     t=1                                     t=1                                t=1


and thus

     T
     X                   T
                         X                                               T
                                                                         X                    T
                                                                                              X
           lt · xt+1 −         lt · xt ≤ (R(xT +1 ) − R(x1 ))/η +              lt · xT +1 −         lt · x t ≤ 0 .
     t=1                 t=1                                             t=1                  t=1


    We focus first on the left inequality. By definition of xT +1 , GT +1 (xT +1 ) ≤
                                         P                             P
GT +1 (u0 ), implying that R(xT +1 )/η + Tt=1 lt · xT +1 ≤ R(u0 )/η + Tt=1 lt · u0 . There-
     P                 P                                   P              P
fore, Tt=1 lt · xt+1 − Tt=1 lt · xt ≤ (R(u0 ) − R(x1 ))/η + Tt=1 lt · u0 − Tt=1 lt · xt , and
3.5. APPENDIX: ADDITIONAL CLAIMS AND MISSING PROOFS                                                                        59

rearranging,

                                        T
                                        X
                 RRF T L(η,R),T ≤             lt · (xt − xt+1 ) + (R(u0 ) − R(x1 ))/η ,
                                        t=1


which is the known upper bound expression on the regret of RFTL.
   Moving on to the other inequality, we have that

                               T
                               X                  T
                                                  X
        RRF T L(η,R),T =             lt · x t −         lt · u 0
                               t=1                t=1
                                                                         T                    T
                                                                                                               !
                                                                         X                    X
                             ≥ (R(xT +1 ) − R(x1 ))/η +                        lt · xT +1 −         lt · u 0       .
                                                                         t=1                  t=1

                                                                                        PT                         PT
It holds that (R(xT +1 )−R(x1 ))/η ≥ 0 by definition of x1 , and                              t=1 lt ·xT +1 −          t=1 lt ·

u0 ≥ 0 by definition of u0 .

   We note that a lower bound on the regret of RFTL may also be shown more directly.
Specifically, setting L0 = 0 and x0 = x1 , it holds that

          T
          X                  T
                             X                                     T
                                                                   X
                x t · lt =         (xt · Lt + R(xt )/η) −                (xt · Lt−1 + R(xt )/η)
          t=1                t=1                                   t=1
                             XT                                    XT
                       ≥           (xt · Lt + R(xt )/η) −                (xt−1 · Lt−1 + R(xt−1 )/η)
                             t=1                                   t=1

                       = (xT · LT + R(xT )/η) − (x0 · L0 + R(x0 )/η)

                       = (R(xT ) − R(x1 ))/η + (xT · LT − u0 · LT ) + u0 · LT ,


where the inequality is by definition of xt . Since (R(xT )−R(x1 ))/η ≥ 0 by definition of
x1 and xT · LT ≥ u0 · LT by definition of u0 , the regret of RFTL must be non-negative.
We point out that the above lower bound features xT instead of xT +1 , which appears
in the extended FTL-BTL lemma. This difference may be eliminated by using T − 1
instead of T in the proof of the lemma.
Chapter 4


Regret Minimization for
Branching Experts

4.1       Introduction

In this chapter, we design algorithms for the best expert setting with refined regret
bounds in terms of the number of experts, N . Our algorithms are able to control regret
when N may grow over time, but the experts’ cumulative losses enjoy specific patterns
that naturally occur in practical scenarios. These patterns are captured by the notion
of “branching experts”, in which the addition of new experts to the pool creates a tree
structure. Although our algorithms are designed for this branching experts setting,
when applied to the standard N -expert setting they deliver regret bounds where the
“complexity” term log N associated with the set of N experts does not occur.
      For the sake of illustration, consider the following sequential path-planning problem
on a graph [59]. The number N of available paths from source to destination (i.e.,
experts in the game) is very large, and the loss of a path picked at time t is the sum
over the current costs (at the same time t) of the edges included in the path. One
may expect that in T prediction steps only a small number ΛT of paths have become
“leaders” at any time t ≤ T , where a path i is leader at time t if its cumulative loss Li,t
is the smallest over all paths. We show that a variant of Hedge, played over a growing
pool of leaders,1 achieves a regret bound that only depends on the number of leaders,
rather than on the number of experts. In general, in a game with N experts and ΛT
                                                                               p      
leaders, we prove that the regret of our modified Hedge is O ΛT (1 + ln L∗T ) + L∗T ΛT ,
  1
      Note that in this example a leader can be found efficiently by solving a shortest path problem.


                                                  60
4.1. INTRODUCTION                                                                      61

independent of N . Our result is actually phrased in a more general model, where the
notion of leader is parameterized by a value α ≥ 0 and ΛT is replaced by Λα,T . This
value represents the edge an expert must have over the loss of the previous leaders in
order to become leader itself.

   A second natural scenario we consider is one where the cumulative losses of all
experts remain clustered around the loss values of a few experts. Intuitively, as far
as regret is concerned experts that have similar cumulative losses are interchangeable.
Hence, working with one representative in each cluster is a convenient approximation
of the original problem, and one expects the regret to be controlled by the number of
clusters, rather than by the overall number of experts. As before, we make a reduction
to the setting of a growing pool of experts. We start with a single cluster (all experts
start off with zero loss) and then split a cluster (i.e., increase the pool of experts by
at least one) whenever the largest cumulative loss difference within the cluster exceeds
some threshold that depends on a size parameter α ≥ 0. We prove that the regret of
                                                                      p
our Hedge variant is at most of order Nα,T (1 + αNα,T )(1 + ln L∗T ) + L∗T Nα,T , if the
experts may indeed be divided into Nα,T α-similar subsets after T steps.

   In both of the above settings, of few leading experts and of clustered experts, our
algorithm is essentially optimal: We prove that the main terms of both regret bounds,
p ∗            p
  LT Λα,T and L∗T Nα,T , are only improvable by constant factors. The same result is
also proven for the general case of a growing set of experts.

   We then turn our attention to the bandit setting. Here, as a motivating scenario
for the growing set of experts, consider a framework where we apply heuristics to solve
a sequence of instances of a hard optimization problem. This task can be naturally
cast in a bandit setting, where just a single heuristic is tested on each instance. Now
suppose that new heuristics become available as time goes by, and we add them to the
pool of candidate heuristics in order to improve our chances. Some of them might be
variants of other heuristics in the pool, and some others might be completely new. In
all cases, we would like to control the regret of the bandit algorithm with respect to the
growing pool of heuristics. Now, if a variant i′ of some heuristic i already in the pool
becomes available at time t, then it is reasonable to compute the regret against a pair
of compound experts that use i up to time t, and from then on either i or its variant i′ .
On the other hand, if a heuristic k unrelated to any other in the pool is added at time
t, then we want to compare to a pair of compound experts that use the best heuristic
62         CHAPTER 4. REGRET MINIMIZATION FOR BRANCHING EXPERTS

up to time t and then either stick to it, or switch to k.


     In this context, we introduce a new non-trivial modification of Exp3, and show that
                                                          √
its expected regret is at most of order 1+(ln f )/(ln NT ) T NT ln NT , where NT is the
final number of experts, and f stands for the product of the degrees of nodes along the
branch leading to the best expert. This factor may be as small as Θ(1) and is always
bounded by K dT , where dT is the number of time steps in which some new expert was
added to the pool, and K is the branching factor of the tree of experts.




4.2      Branching Experts with Full Information



We consider a modification of prediction with expert advice where the adversary grad-
ually reveals the experts to the learner. Specifically, the game between adversary and
learner starts with one known expert. As the game progresses, the adversary may
choose to reveal the existence of more experts. Once an expert is revealed, the learner
may start using it by placing some weight on its decisions. The regret of a learner at
the end of the game is measured w.r.t. all revealed experts.


     Each newly revealed expert is given some history, in the form of a starting loss
closely related to the cumulative loss of one of the previously revealed experts. In our
setup we therefore consider each newly revealed expert as an approximate clone of an
existing expert in terms of its cumulative loss. From that point on, the new expert is
allowed to freely diverge from its parent. Let 1, . . . , Nt be the indices of the experts
revealed after the first t rounds, with N0 = 1. This process of approximate cloning
results in a tree structure where, at any time t ≥ 1, the root is the initial expert (the
one at time t = 0) and the leaves correspond to the Nt experts participating in the
game at time t. For convenience, when an expert is cloned, one of the clones is used
to represent the continuation of the original expert (i.e., it is a perfect clone). We now
describe the game in more detail.
4.2. BRANCHING EXPERTS WITH FULL INFORMATION                                                        63


  For each round t = 1, 2, . . . , T

        1. For each expert i = 1, . . . , Nt−1 , the adversary reveals a set C(i, t) of experts
           containing i itself and possibly additional approximate clones. The adversary
           also reveals the past losses Lj,t−2 , lj,t−1 for each j ∈ C(i, t). The new experts
           are indexed by Nt−1 + 1, . . . , Nt .
                                                         
        2. The learner chooses pt = p1,t , . . . , pNt ,t .
                                                                  
        3. The adversary reveals losses lt = l1,t , . . . , lNt ,t , and the learner suffers a loss
           p t · lt .

       The reason why the pair Lj,t−2 , lj,t−1 is revealed instead of its sum Lj,t−2 + lj,t−1
is explained in Footnote 4. We use m(t) = arg mini=1,...,Nt {Li,t } to denote the index
of the best expert in the first t steps (where we take the smallest such index in case of
a tie), so that L∗T = Lm(T ),T . The regret of an algorithm A is then defined as usual,
RA,T = LA,T − L∗T . In order to have the standard expert scenario as a special case of
the branching one, we set Lj,t , lj,t = 0 for t ≤ 0 and for all j. In the standard expert
scenario N1 = |C(1, 1)| corresponds to the number N of experts. In order to facilitate
a comparison to the standard expert bounds, we express our branching experts bounds
in terms of this quantity N1 .
       In order to elucidate the combinatorial tree structure underlying this notion of re-
gret, consider the simple case when Lj,t−1 = Li,t−1 for all j ∈ C(i, t), all i = 1, . . . , Nt−1 ,
and all t. Hence, each new expert j starts off as a perfect clone of its parent expert i.
Now, at each time T the learner is competing with the set of NT compound experts
associated with the paths i0 , i1 , . . . , iT , where i0 is the “root expert” and it ∈ C(it−1 , t)
for all t = 1, . . . , T . This combinatorial interpretation will help in comparing our results
to other settings of compound experts.
                                                              
       When clones are not perfect, we use αi,t−1 = max           Lj,t−2 − Lk,t−2 : j, k ∈ C(i, t)
to denote the “diameter” of a split.2 Since the learner has no control over αi,t at each
split, it may suffer the sum of those elements from the root to the leaf of the best
expert in the form of regret. Furthermore, the splits increase the number of experts,
which means that upper bounds on the regret must also grow. Interestingly, there are
natural scenarios where the above quantities are small. In these scenarios, described in
   2
     Note that perfect cloning is not equivalent to a split with diameter zero. This discrepancy is due
to technical issues that arise in Section 4.5.
64         CHAPTER 4. REGRET MINIMIZATION FOR BRANCHING EXPERTS

Section 4.5, the role of revealing new experts is taken from the adversary and given to
the learner. Specifically, all the experts are known at the beginning of the game, and it
is the learner that decides to gradually start using some of them. Generally speaking,
in such scenarios the vast majority of experts are either poor candidates for being the
best expert, or perform comparably to some other experts, making them safe for the
learner to ignore. The important observation to be made is that any algorithm and
analysis that hold when the splits are determined by the adversary may also be used if
the splits are determined by the learner. Although referring to the best overall expert
rather than the best revealed expert clearly increases the regret, this difference will be
bounded for the scenarios we consider, and easily taken into account.



4.3      Related Work

Prediction with expert advice when the pool of experts varies over time has been
investigated in the past. The model of “sleeping experts”, or “specialists” [15, 39],
allows a subset At of the experts to be awake at each time step t, where At is determined
by a time-selection function. The regret is then measured against each expert only on
the time steps when it was awake. Although we may view our setting of branching
experts as a special case of sleeping experts (where experts are progressively woken
up), their notion of regret is different from ours, since we compete against compound
experts, associated with paths on the expert tree. Therefore, the two settings are
incomparable.

     Branching experts can also be viewed as special cases of more general combinato-
rial constructions, like the permutation experts of [60] or the shifting experts of [53].
Although in some cases these more general settings can be extended to accommodate
growing sets of experts —see, e.g., [83], the resulting regret bounds are much worse
than ours, mainly due to the dependence on ln(NT T ), where NT is the total number of
experts in the pool after T steps. Our bounds, instead, depend in a more detailed way
on the structure of the expert tree, and replace ln(NT T ) with ln Π, where Π depends
on the splits on the branches that the leading experts belong to, and can thus be much
smaller than NT —see discussion in the next paragraph.

     In the case of perfect cloning, which was mentioned in Section 4.2, Hedge may
directly simulate the branching experts if we limit the number of rounds in which splits
4.3. RELATED WORK                                                                           65

occur to at most d, and the maximal degree of a split to at most K, where d and K
are preliminarily available. Taking N1 = 1, this limits the final number of compound
experts to at most K d . An application of standard Hedge then leads to the regret
               p
bound d ln K + 2L∗T d ln K. Our modified Hedge, called HedC , virtually obtains the
same bound (with slightly worse constants) without preliminary knowledge of the tree
structure. However, we may do much better in cases where there are few splits along
the branches where the set of leading experts occur. In fact, the main term in the
                                 p
regret bound of HedC is of order L∗T ln Π, where Π can be Θ(1) even when NT is
exponential in T .

   It is also instructive to consider a type of scenario in which any advantage of HedC
over Hedge is removed. Specifically, assume that all the splits are announced in the
initial rounds of the game. In these initial rounds no losses are incurred, and afterwards,
the game proceeds with a fixed number of experts. It is possible to design such a scenario
                                                                                 p       
with N + 1 experts (for a large enough N ) such that the regret of HedC is Ω L∗T N
                                                         p          
while Hedge has the usual regret bound of O ln N + L∗T ln N (see Claim 4.13 in
                                                                  p
Section 4.8). Since Theorem 4.3 in Section 4.4 gives an O N + L∗T N ) regret for this
case, it is arguably a worst-case scenario for HedC . Clearly enough, in order to make
HedC achieve a similar regret as Hedge in this hard case, without losing much of its
advantage in the others, it suffices to add a meta-Hedge algorithm aggregating the two.

   In the bandit setting, our modification of Exp3 for branching experts, called Exp3.C,
                                                              √
has an expected regret bound of the order 1 + (ln f )/(ln NT ) T NT ln NT , containing
          √
the factor NT (see Section 4.7). It seems plausible that the modification of Exp3 for
shifting experts, Exp3.S, could be extended to a growing pool of experts along the lines
                                                            p
of [83]. The resulting regret bound would be of the order T NT ST ln(NT T ), where
ST is the number of times it 6= it+1 in the path i0 , i1 , . . . , iT from the root to the best
action iT = m(T ). These two bounds appear to be incomparable.

   We now move on to discussing related work in the standard N -expert setting, with
fixed N . There are a few examples of expert algorithms whose regret bound does
not depend on the number of experts. The most trivial example is Follow the Leader
(FTL), namely, the algorithm that deterministically picks the current best expert. It
is easy to see that the regret of FTL is bounded by the number of times the leader
changes, no matter if the same few leaders keep alternating. Another trivial example
is Hedge run with uneven initial weights, which implicitly assumes using a prior that
66         CHAPTER 4. REGRET MINIMIZATION FOR BRANCHING EXPERTS

peaks on a small set containing the best expert. A substantially less trivial example
is the NormalHedge algorithm of [26], and its refinement due to [27]. Except for con-
stant factors, a bound on the cumulative loss of these algorithms can be written as
                      p
inf 0≤ǫ≤1 {Lσ(ǫN ),T + T ln(1/ǫ)}, where σ(1), . . . , σ(N ) is a permutation of expert in-
dices such that Lσ(1),T ≤ · · · ≤ Lσ(N ),T . This bound is incomparable to our bounds for
few leaders and clustered experts. Indeed, it is easy to find examples where our bounds
dominate NormalHedge’s. (Think of one expert with constant total loss, and the re-
maining N − 1 experts with linear losses always clustered around a single value: Then
ǫ must be 1/N to ensure sublinear regret, while ΛT and Nα,T can be made constant.)

     Finally, we could apply the Fixed Share algorithm of [53] for shifting experts to
the few leaders setting. By doing so, we would get a regret bound of the order of
p
  T ST ln(N T ), where ST is the number of times the current leader changes. Now, even
in the best case for Fixed Share (i.e., when ST = ΛT − 1) our bound for HedC is still
                              p
better by a factor of at least ln(N T ). Using more sophisticated shifting algorithms,
like Mixing Past Posteriors [18], may improve on the ST ln N term in the Fixed Share
bound, but it does not affect the other term ST ln T . Recently, [61] gave a surprising
Bayesian interpretation to Mixing Past Posteriors. Finding a similarly efficient Bayesian
formulation of our branching experts construction is an open problem.

     The few leaders and the clustered experts settings take advantage of specific “sub-
optimalities” in the loss sequence chosen by the adversary. Adaptive procedures able
to take advantage of such suboptimalities were also proposed by [75]. Relating those
results to the ones derived in this chapter remains an interesting open problem.




4.4      Adapting Hedge for the Branching Setup


The main change that is required to handle the new setup is deciding on weights for
newly revealed experts. We will handle this problem by applying a general mechanism
we term a partial restart. A partial restart redistributes the weights wi,t of existing
experts among all experts, old and new, without changing the sum of the weights.
Following this redistribution, the usual exponential update step takes place.
4.4. ADAPTING HEDGE FOR THE BRANCHING SETUP                                                      67


  Hedge with Partial Restarts
  For each round t = 1, 2, . . . , T

     1. Get the new experts Nt−1 + 1, . . . , Nt together with their past losses
         Lj,t−2 , lj,t−1 for j = Nt−1 + 1, . . . , Nt .
                                                               ′
     2. From w1,t−1 , . . . , wNt−1 ,t−1 compute new weights w1,t−1            ′
                                                                    , . . . , wN        ≥ 0 such
                                                                                 t ,t−1
                                               P
              ′
        that Wt−1 = Wt−1 , where Wt−1      ′ = N    t  ′
                                                  i=1 wi,t−1 .

                                        ′
     3. Update the new weights: wi,t = wi,t−1 e−ηli,t−1 , and set pi,t = wi,t /Wt , for
         each i = 1, . . . , Nt .
                                                 
     4. Observe losses lt = l1,t , . . . , lNt ,t and suffer loss pt · lt .




    Note that an ordinary (full) restart is equivalent to a partial restart where all experts
are assigned equal weights. A partial restart, in contrast to a full restart, may preserve
                                                            ′ are defined.
more information about the preceding run, depending on how wi,t

    If an algorithm is an augmentation of Hedge with partial restarts, its loss is upper
bounded by an expression that depends explicitly on the number of restarts, and only
implicitly on their exact nature. This bound is given in the next lemma.




Lemma 4.1. Let 0 < η ≤ 1 and let A be an augmentation of Hedge with at most n
partial restarts. Then ln(WT +1 /W1 ) ≤ −(1 − e−η )(LA,T − n).




                             ′ e−ηli,t and W ′ = W for every i = 1, . . . , N
Proof. Recall that wi,t+1 = wi,t            t     t                           t+1 , t =
                                                 ′ /W ′ for all i = 1, . . . , N
1, . . . , T and note that Wt′ > 0. Let p′i,t = wi,t t                           t+1 , so that

p′t = (p′1,t , . . . , p′Nt+1 ,t ) is a probability vector. Hence, for every t,

                            PNt+1                 PNt+1     ′ e−ηli,t       N
                                                           wi,t            X
                                                                           t+1
             Wt+1              i=1 wi,t+1            i=1
          ln      = ln                    = ln                        = ln     p′i,t e−ηli,t .
              Wt                 Wt′                       Wt′
                                                                              i=1

                                                                          ′ = w
Now, if there is no restart at time t + 1, that is |C(i, t + 1)| = 1 and wi,t   i,t for

all i = 1, . . . , Nt , then Nt+1 = Nt and p′i,t = pi,t , i = 1, . . . , Nt . In this case, by the
68            CHAPTER 4. REGRET MINIMIZATION FOR BRANCHING EXPERTS

                                                       
convexity of f (x) = ex , we have e−ηli,t ≤ 1 − 1 − e−η li,t . Hence we can write

                                   Nt+1                        Nt
                                   X                           X
                              ln          p′i,t e−ηli,t = ln         pi,t e−ηli,t
                                   i=1                         i=1
                                                               XNt
                                                                                                
                                                       ≤ ln          pi,t 1 − (1 − e−η )li,t
                                                               i=1

                                                       ≤ −(1 − e−η )pt · lt

                                                       = −(1 − e−η )lA,t .


On the other hand, if a restart takes place, then we have

              Nt+1                          Nt+1                                                         Nt+1
              X                             X                                                           X
         ln          p′i,t e−ηli,t ≤ ln            p′i,t 1 − (1 − e−η )li,t         ≤ −(1 − e   −η
                                                                                                     )          p′i,t li,t
              i=1                           i=1                                                          i=1

                                                                                        PNt+1
which is trivially upper bounded by −(1−e−η )(lA,t −1), since                             i=1       p′i,t li,t ≥ 0 ≥ lA,t −1.
     Thus, if n′ ≤ n is the number of restarts,

                         T
         WT +1 X Wt+1                                              
      ln      = ln    ≤ −(1 − e−η ) LA,T − n′ ≤ −(1 − e−η ) LA,T − n .
          W1       Wt
                        t=1




                                                             ′ out of the weights w ,
     We now describe a specific way of defining the weights wi,t                   i,t

and call HedC the resulting partially restarting variant of Hedge. The algorithm starts
by setting wj,1 = 1 for every expert j = 1, . . . , N1 , where N1 = |C(1, 1)|.3 At time t + 1,
its partial restart stage distributes the weight of a parent expert i among experts in
C(i, t + 1) while maintaining the same weight proportions as ordinary Hedge. Namely,

                 ′                      e−ηLj,t−1
                wj,t = wi,t P                     −ηLk,t−1
                                                           ,                for every j ∈ C(i, t + 1)
                                     k∈C(i,t+1) e


(recall that Lj,t−1 , for j ∈ C(i, t + 1), are all revealed to the algorithm).4 Note that
                                                                             ′ = w .
when |C(i, t + 1)| = 1 —that is, expert i is not cloned at time t + 1, then wi,t  i,t

As a step towards bounding the regret of HedC , we first lower bound the weights it
assigns to experts.
   3
     Alternatively, we may set w1,0 = 1 for the single expert existing at time t = 0. This causes a
minor difference in the regret bounds.
   4                                 ′
     The two-stage update wi,t → wi,t  → wi,t+1 is the reason why pairs of losses Lj,t−1 and lj,t are
provided for each new expert i = Nt + 1, . . . , Nt+1 .
4.4. ADAPTING HEDGE FOR THE BRANCHING SETUP                                                                      69

Lemma 4.2. If i is an expert at time t ≥ 1, and i0 , . . . , it = i are the experts along the
path from the root to i in the branching experts tree, then
                                                                   ! t−1
                                               t−1
                                               X                     Y           n                      o−1
       wit ,t ≥ exp −ηLit ,t−1 − η                        αiτ ,τ              max 1, 2 C(iτ , τ + 1) − 2    .
                                               τ =1                    τ =1



Proof. Recall that i0 , . . . , it is a path from the root i0 to expert it in the branching
experts tree, where iτ ∈ C(iτ −1 , τ ) for all τ = 1, . . . , t. We first prove by induction that

                                             t−1 
                                             Y                                         −1
                                                                             
                  wit ,t ≥ e−ηLit ,t−1                1 + |C(iτ , τ + 1)| − 1 eηαiτ ,τ     .
                                             τ =1


For t = 1 both sides equal 1 and the claim is trivial. We next assume the claim holds
for t and prove it for t + 1. For every t we have that

                 X                                                       X
                            e−ηLj,t−1 = e−ηLit ,t−1                               e−η(Lj,t−1 −Lit ,t−1 )
             j∈C(it ,t+1)                                          j∈C(it ,t+1)
                                                                                        
                                            ≤ e−ηLit ,t−1 1 + |C(it , t + 1)| − 1 eηαit ,t ,

                                    
where we used αit ,t = max               Lj,t−1 − Lk,t−1 : j, k ∈ C(it , t + 1) and also it ∈ C(it , t+
1). Thus

                                                                           e−ηLit+1 ,t
           wit+1 ,t+1 = wi′t+1 ,t e−ηlit+1 ,t = wit ,t P                               −ηLj,t−1
                                                                        j∈C(it ,t+1) e
                                                                                                      −1
                                     −η Lit+1 ,t −Lit ,t−1
                        ≥ wit ,t e                                      1 + |C(it , t + 1)| − 1 eηαit ,t
                                            t 
                                            Y                                        −1
                                                                           
                        ≥ e−ηLit+1 ,t               1 + |C(iτ , τ + 1)| − 1 eηαiτ ,τ
                                            τ =1


completing the induction. It is easy to verify that

                                                
           1 + |C(iτ , τ + 1)| − 1 eηαiτ ,τ ≤ max 1, 2|C(iτ , τ + 1)| − 2 eηαiτ ,τ


and thus

                                  t−1 
                                  Y                                            −1
                     −ηLit ,t−1
                                             
        wit ,t ≥ e                        max 1, 2|C(iτ , τ + 1)| − 2 eηαiτ ,τ
                                  τ =1
                                                   t−1
                                                                   ! t−1
                                                   X                 Y                                   −1
              = exp −ηLit ,t−1 − η                        αiτ ,τ              max 1, 2|C(iτ , τ + 1)| − 2    .
                                                   τ =1                τ =1
70            CHAPTER 4. REGRET MINIMIZATION FOR BRANCHING EXPERTS




   We can now combine Lemmas 4.1 and 4.2 to upper bound the regret of HedC . In
                              Q          n                      o         P
what follows we denote Πt = N1 t−1
                                τ =1 max   1, 2 C(i τ , τ +1) −2  and At = t−1
                                                                            τ =1 αiτ ,τ ,

where i0 , . . . , it = m(t) is a path from the root to the best expert at time t. Note that
neither Πt nor At are monotone in t because the index of the best expert m(t) changes
over time. We also denote dt for the number of rounds in 2, . . . , t in which splits
occurred.

Theorem 4.3. Let L′ and Π′ be known upper bounds on L∗T + AT +1 and ΠT +1 , respec-
                     p             
tively. If η = ln 1 + (2 ln Π′ )/L′ , then the regret of HedC satisfies

                                                           √
                         RHedC ,T ≤ dT + AT +1 + ln Π′ +       2L′ ln Π′ .


Proof. By Lemma 4.2 we have that

          WT +1      wm(T ),T +1                                             
     ln         ≥ ln             ≥ −ηL∗T − ηAT +1 − ln ΠT +1 ≥ −η L∗T + AT +1 − ln Π′ .
           W1           N1

In addition, by Lemma 4.1, ln(WT +1 /W1 ) ≤ −(1 − e−η )(LHedC ,T − dT ). Combining the
upper and lower bounds for ln(WT +1 /W1 ) and rearranging, we have
                                                        
                                           η L∗T + AT +1 + ln Π′
                           LHedC ,T − dT ≤                       .
                                                  1 − e−η

The rest of the proof is similar to the standard proof of Hedge and is given here
for completeness. Denote ν = ln Π′ and L = L∗T + AT +1 . It is easily verified that
η ≤ 12 (eη − e−η ) for every η ≥ 0, and therefore,

                                  1
                                      (eη − e−η )L + ν     ν     L
                  LHedC ,T − dT ≤ 2           −η
                                                       =     −η
                                                                + (eη + 1) .
                                          1−e            1−e     2
                                             p
Recall that we set η such that eη = 1 +       2ν/L′ , and therefore

                                                                   ν     L
             RHedC ,T = LHedC ,T + AT +1 − L ≤ dT + AT +1 +          −η
                                                                        + (eη − 1)
                                                                 1−e     2
                                        ν      L′ η
                      ≤ dT + AT +1 +         +   (e − 1)
                                     1 − e−η   2
                                         p           L′ p
                      = dT + AT +1 + 1 + L′ /(2ν) ν +      2ν/L′
                                                         2
                                         √
                      = dT + AT +1 + ν + 2L′ ν
4.5. APPLICATIONS                                                                         71

completing the proof.


   In the standard N -expert setting, αi,t = 0 for all i and t, implying AT +1 = 0.
Moreover, dT = 0 and ΠT +1 = N . Therefore, in this special case Theorem 4.3 recovers
the standard regret bound of Hedge.
   The requirement in Theorem 4.3 that bounds be known in advance may be relaxed
by using a doubling trick. Since the index of the best expert m(t) changes over time,
the doubling is applied to a bound L′τ on the quantity maxt≤τ {L∗t + At+1 } and to a
                                             
bound ντ on the quantity ln maxt≤τ {Πt+1 } . For any single value of L′τ , ντ is doubled
                                                                             p      
O(ln νT ) times, and the total regret of runs is O 1 + dT + A ln νT + νT + L′τ νT ,
where we denote A = maxt≤T {At+1 }. Adding up these values for all doubled values of
L′τ yields a regret bound of

                                                              q         
           RHedC ,T = O          1 + dT + A ln νT + νT ln L′T +1 + L′T +1 νT .          (4.1)


Note that L′T +1 ≤ 2 max{L∗t + At+1 } ≤ 2(L∗T + A), where the first inequality holds
                        t≤T
since L′T +1   is doubled only until it exceeds maxt≤T {L∗t + At+1 }.           This gives
q                  p
   (L′T +1 /2)νT ≤ L∗T νT + 21 (A + νT ). Therefore, (4.1) gives the following.

Corollary 4.4. Let A = maxt≤T {At+1 } and Π = maxt≤T {Πt+1 }. Applying a doubling
trick to HedC yields the regret bound

                                                                     p        
       RHedC ,T = O        1 + ln L∗T + A        (dT + A) ln ln Π + ln Π + L∗T ln Π .


   Finally, we point out that if K ≥ 2 is the maximal degree of splits in the tree for
                                                 p
t > 1, then Π ≤ N1 (2K − 2)dT , and the main term L∗T ln Π in the above regret bound
                 q                   
becomes of order     ln N1 + dT ln K L∗T .



4.5     Applications

Few leading experts. We consider a best expert scenario with N experts, where
the set of experts that happen to be “leaders” throughout the game is small. The
set of all-time leaders (leader set, for short) includes initially only the first expert. In
every round the current best expert is added to the set iff its current cumulative loss is
strictly smaller than the cumulative loss of all experts in the leader set. We generalize
72         CHAPTER 4. REGRET MINIMIZATION FOR BRANCHING EXPERTS

this definition by requiring that the advantage over all experts in the leader set must
be strictly greater than α ≥ 0, where α is a parameter. Formally, the leader set starts
as S1 = {1}, and at the beginning of each round t > 1, St = St−1 ∪ {m(t − 1)} iff
Lm(t−1),t−1 + α < Lj,t−1 for every expert j ∈ St−1 . In adversarial branching terms, we
will consider such a new leader as “revealed” at time t. It will branch off the former
best expert i in St−1 , namely, the one that satisfies Li,t−2 ≤ Lj,t−2 for every j ∈ St−1
(where the smallest index is taken in a tie). Thus a split will always have two children:
a previous leader and the new one.
     We denote the number of leaders in the first T steps by Λα,T . We assume that
upper bounds Λ′α ≥ Λα,T and L′ ≥ L∗T are known in advance (although the identities
of the leaders are not), where a doubling trick is used to guess both quantities. The
learner may run HedC while simulating an adversary that reveals experts gradually,
making Theorem 4.3 applicable with the following settings: N1 = 1, dT = Λα,T − 1,
At+1 ≤ dT max{α, 1 − α}, and Πt+1 ≤ 2dT . This provides a bound on the regret w.r.t.
the best revealed expert. Since the cumulative loss of the best overall expert is smaller
by at most α + 1, we simply need to add α + 1 to this bound to get a bound on the
regret. We thus obtain the following.

Theorem 4.5. Let α1 = max{α, 1 − α}. In the few leading experts scenario, the
                                                p                                 
regret of HedC run with parameters η = ln 1 + (2 ln 2)(Λ′α − 1)/(L′ + (Λ′α − 1)α1 ) ,
                                 ′
                                                                      p           
L′ = L′ +(Λ′α −1)α1 , and Π′ = 2Λα −1 satisfies RHedC ,T = O Λ′α (α+1)+ (Λ′α − 1)L′ .

     We point out that there is a trade-off in the choice of α, since an increase in α causes
a decrease in Λα,T . A doubling trick may again be applied to guess both Λ′α and L′ :
When either bound is violated, the bound is doubled and the algorithm is restarted.

Corollary 4.6. Applying a doubling trick to HedC in the few leading experts scenario
                                                     p        
yields a regret bound of O Λα,T (α + 1)(1 + ln L∗T ) + L∗T Λα,T .


Clustered experts.        We next consider a best expert scenario where experts may be
divided into a small number of subsets such that the cumulative losses inside each subset
are “similar” at all times. Intuitively, working with one representative of each subset
instead of the individual experts is a good approximation for the original problem. An
important difference is that the number of representatives may be much smaller than
the number of experts, making the regret bound better. Given the approximated regret
4.5. APPLICATIONS                                                                             73

bound, the maximal “diameter” of the subsets may be added to obtain a regret bound
for the original problem.
   Formally, let α ≥ 0 be predetermined by the learner, and let Nα,T be the number
of subsets of experts that are α-similar after T steps. Namely, for every t = 1, . . . , T
and every experts i and j in the same subset, |Li,t − Lj,t | ≤ α. As before, we start by
assuming we know upper bounds Nα′ ≥ Nα,T and L′ ≥ L∗T , and eventually relax this
assumption using a doubling trick.
   The learner will implement HedC in conjunction with the following splitting scheme.
Initially, all experts reside in the same cluster. For every t, a cluster is split at the
beginning of time t + 1 iff the difference between the cumulative losses of any two
experts inside it at time t exceeds β = (2Nα′ − 1)α. To split a cluster, we first sort
its members by their cumulative loss at time t. Then we find the largest gap between
cumulative loss values and split there. (If more than one maximal gap exists, we pick
one arbitrarily.) Since β ≥ (2Nα,T − 1)α and all the subsets are α-similar, this gap
must be larger than α. Furthermore, members of any given subset cannot be on both
sides of the gap. Next, if the gap in either of the two parts is larger than β, the process
is repeated. Thus, β is an upper bound on the diameter of each cluster (i.e., the largest
difference |Li,T − Lj,T | over pairs of experts i, j in the cluster) after any number T of
steps. In addition, since clusters always contain entire subsets, the total number of
splits after T steps does not exceed Nα,T − 1.
   We apply Theorem 4.3 with the settings N1 = 1, dT ≤ Nα′ − 1, and At+1 ≤
βdT ≤ (2Nα′ − 1)(Nα′ − 1) α. As for Π′ , recall that it upper bounds ΠT +1 =
QT        
  τ =1 max 1, 2|C(iτ , τ + 1)| − 2 , since N1 = 1. Let n1 , . . . , nk be the values of

2|C(iτ , τ + 1)| − 2 in the product that are not zero. We have

                k              k
                                     !k                      k
                Y            1X                   2Nα,T − 2
      ΠT +1 =         ni ≤      ni        ≤                        ≤ exp{(2/e)(Nα,T − 1)} ,
                             k                       k
                i=1           i=1


where the last inequality holds since the function (a/x)x is maximized at x = a/e for
every a > 0. We may thus set Π′ = exp{(2/e)(Nα′ − 1)}. Theorem 4.3 now yields a
bound on the regret w.r.t. the best revealed expert. We still need to add to this bound
the quantity β + 1, which bounds the difference between the cumulative losses of the
best revealed expert and the best overall expert. We obtain the following result for the
case of α-similar subsets.
74         CHAPTER 4. REGRET MINIMIZATION FOR BRANCHING EXPERTS

Theorem 4.7. In the clustered experts scenario, the regret of HedC run with parameters
       q                                             
η = ln 1+ (4/e)(Nα′ − 1) L′ + (2Nα′ − 1)(Nα′ − 1)α and L′ = L′ +(2Nα′ −1)(Nα′ −
                                                  p             
1)α satisfies RHedC ,T = O Nα′ (1 + (2Nα′ − 1)α) + L′ (Nα′ − 1) .

     If both Nα′ and L′ are unknown, a doubling trick once again may be used.

Corollary 4.8. Applying a doubling trick to HedC in the clustered experts setting yields
                                                    p        
a regret bound of O Nα,T (1 + αNα,T )(1 + ln L∗T ) + L∗T Nα,T .

Remark 4.9. If losses are stochastic (or contain a stochastic element), the diameter of
a set of experts grows gradually over time, rather than remaining constant. Fix a time
horizon T and consider N experts with i.i.d. Bernoulli random losses. For δ ∈ (0, 1),
                              p
the diameter of this set is O( T ln(N/δ)) with probability at least 1 − δ. This is shown
by combining a “maximal” concentration inequality with the union bound. Picking
      p                                                            p
α = Θ( T ln(N/δ)) for this case thus yields a single cluster and O( T ln(N/δ)) regret.
A similar argument applies to the few leading experts scenario.



4.6      Lower Bounds

In this section we prove lower bounds for the branching setup, as well as the few
leaders and clustered experts scenarios of Section 4.5. We show that the key term in
                                                    p
the regret bound of HedC for the branching setting, L∗T ln Π (see Corollary 4.4), may
                                                                            p
not be improved in general. The same holds for the corresponding terms L∗T Λα,T
     p
and L∗T Nα,T for the other two scenarios (Corollaries 4.6 and 4.8, respectively) if the
number of leaders or similar subsets is at most logarithmic in the number of experts.
This condition is clearly necessary, since otherwise Hedge itself guarantees better regret
than HedC .
     We use a single construction for all the above scenarios. It involves an oblivious
stochastic adversary whose branching tree is a highly unbalanced comb-shaped tree,
that is, with splits occurring only in a single branch. This construction and accom-
panying lemma are geared towards the case of subsets of identical experts, but are
useful for the other scenarios as well. The construction proceeds as follows. Given
N for the number of experts and K for the number of unique experts, we define sets
S1 ⊃ S2 ⊃ · · · ⊃ SK of experts, where S1 = {1, . . . , N }, and Si+1 is a random half of Si ,
which contains the best expert. The K distinct subsets are Sj \ Sj+1 , for j = 1, . . . , K,
4.6. LOWER BOUNDS                                                                         75

where we define SK+1 = ∅. Just as in proofs for the standard best expert setting (see,
e.g., Theorems 4.7 and 4.8 in Chapter 4 of [72]), this construction prevents any learner
from doing better than random. We comment, however, that additional care is required
to control the number of distinct experts. We make use of the following lemma.

Lemma 4.10. Let li,t ∈ {0, 1} for all i and t, where exactly K loss sequences
(li,1 , . . . , li,T ) are distinct. Even if K is known to the learner, it holds that

  (i) For every T ≤ ⌊log2 N ⌋, there is an oblivious stochastic adversary that generates
      N loss sequences of length T of which K = T +1 are unique, such that the expected
      regret of any algorithm A satisfies E[RA,T ] ≥ T /2.

 (ii) For every T ≥ 1 + ⌊log2 N ⌋ and K ≤ 1 + ⌊log2 N ⌋ there is an oblivious
      stochastic adversary that generates N loss sequences of length T , of which K
      are unique, such that the expected regret of any algorithm A satisfies E[RA,T ] ≥
      1
        p                           p           
      4   ⌊T /(K − 1)⌋(K − 1) = Ω T (K − 1) .

Proof. (i) Consider the following loss sequence generation. At each time t, the adversary
focuses only on the set St of experts, where St = {1 ≤ i ≤ 2⌊log2 N ⌋ : ∀τ < t, li,τ = 0}
(initially, S1 includes all the experts 1 ≤ i ≤ 2⌊log2 N ⌋ ). The set St is then divided
randomly into two equal-sized sets, where the first set is given loss 1 at time t and the
other loss 0. All other experts are given loss 1. Even if the learner has the benefit of
knowing St before deciding on pt , its expected loss at time t is 1/2. (The learner only
stands to lose if it puts weight outside St .) Therefore, in any case, E[LA,T ] ≥ T /2,
while L∗T = 0, implying that E[RA,T ] ≥ T /2. There are exactly T + 1 distinct experts
in the above construction.
    (ii) Consider the following construction of loss sequences by an adversary. Let
τ = ⌊T /(K − 1)⌋ and divide the time range 1, . . . , τ (K − 1) into K − 1 time slices of
size τ . Times (τ (K − 1), T ] may be ignored, since the adversary may assign li,t = 0 for
every 1 ≤ i ≤ N and t ∈ (τ (K −1), T ], so the regret of any algorithm is unaffected. The
adversary defines sets S1 ⊃ S2 ⊃ · · · ⊃ SK of experts, where initially S1 = {1, . . . , N }.
For time slice j, all experts not in Sj incur τ times the loss 1. Denote Sj1 for the first
⌊|Sj |/2⌋ experts in Sj and Sj2 = Sj \ Sj1 . The adversary generates two {0, 1}-valued loss
sequences of size τ by making 2τ i.i.d. draws from the uniform distribution on {0, 1}.
Experts in Sj1 incur the losses in the first sequence, and experts in Sj2 incur the losses in
the second sequence. If the sequences are identical, the adversary modifies its choice by
76         CHAPTER 4. REGRET MINIMIZATION FOR BRANCHING EXPERTS

picking instead the sequences {0, . . . , 0, 1} and {0, . . . , 0, 0} and assigning one of them
randomly to the experts in Sj1 and the other to experts in Sj2 . The set Sj+1 is then
defined as the set among Sj1 and Sj2 with the smallest cumulative loss, or Sj1 in case
of a tie. Note that we end up with exactly K distinct loss sequences, and Sj always
contains an expert with the smallest cumulative loss at any time.
     We may assume w.l.o.g. that in time slice j, the algorithm puts weight only on Sj ,
                                                                       bj for the regret if
and we denote Rj for its regret on the j-th time slice. We also denote R
we had not made the modification for identical sequences. By Lemma 4.14 (see Section
                bj ] ≥ √τ /4, since the expected loss of the algorithm on the time slice
4.8), we have E[R
is τ /2. Denote Bj for the event that the sequences in slice j are identical and B̄j for
                          √          bj ] = E[R
                                              bj | B̄j ]P(B̄j ) + E[R
                                                                    bj | Bj ]P(Bj ) = E[R
                                                                                        bj |
its complement. We have τ /4 ≤ E[R
B̄j ]P(B̄j ), since the regret is 0 if the sequences are identical. In addition, we have


                         E[Rj ] = E[Rj | B̄j ]P(B̄j ) + E[Rj | Bj ]P(Bj )
                                     bj | B̄j ]P(B̄j ) + E[Rj | Bj ]P(Bj )
                                 = E[R
                                                         √
                                     bj | B̄j ]P(B̄j ) ≥ τ /4 ,
                                 ≥ E[R


where the first inequality is true because when Bj occurs, Rj ≥ 0 (one sequence is all
zeros). The set Sj always contains an expert with minimal cumulative loss, so

              K−1
              X                1√             1p                       p         
 E[RA,T ] =         E[Rj ] ≥      τ (K − 1) =   ⌊T /(K − 1)⌋(K − 1) = Ω T (K − 1) .
                               4              4
              j=1




     With the above lemma handy, we start by considering the branching setup. Given T
and K < T , the adversary may generate N = 2T −1 loss sequences of length T according
to part (ii) of Lemma 4.10. At time t it maintains sets of experts with identical histories
up until time t, according to the stochastic construction. These sets are the leaves of
its branching tree, which is a comb-shaped tree with K − 1 binary splits along a single
splitting branch, so we have Π = 2K−1 . The adversary will be extra helpful and reveal
N to the learner in advance, and also reveal at each time t the current composition of
the sets in the leaves. Even so, by Lemma 4.10, the regret of any algorithm A satisfies
               p                 p                           p
E[RA,T ] = Ω T (K − 1) = Ω L∗T ln Π , so the key term L∗T ln Π in the regret
bound for HedC (Corollary 4.4) may not be improved in general.
4.7. BRANCHING EXPERTS FOR THE MULTI-ARMED BANDIT SETTING 77

                                                                p ∗           
   For α-similar subsets, Lemma 4.10 clearly gives an Ω          LT (N0,T − 1) expected
regret bound in the α = 0 case, if N0,T ≤ 1 + ⌊log2 N ⌋ ≤ T . Since the adversary is
                                                       p               
oblivious, we also have N0,T ≥ Nα,T and therefore an Ω L∗T (Nα,T − 1) bound.
    Finally, we may show that for the few leaders scenario, if Λ0,T ≤ 1 + ⌊log2 N ⌋ ≤ cT ,
                                                 p                 
for some c > 0, then the expected regret is Ω L∗T (Λ0,T − 1) . The application of
Lemma 4.10 for this case requires an additional technical step. A closer examination of
our stochastic construction reveals that if a run with K ≤ log2 N is stopped at time T /2,
                                    p             
then the expected regret is still Ω L∗T (K − 1) , the number of leaders is in {1, . . . , K},
                                        √ 
and the set of best experts is of size Θ N . We may then artificially raise the number
                                  √ 
of leaders to K ≤ log2 N = O N by sequentially giving ǫ loss to one member of the
best expert set, and a round later to all the others. The remaining rounds may be filled
with zero losses for all experts. Thus, for any Λ0,T ≤ log2 N , if we run this modified
                                                             p                
procedure with K = Λ0,T , we achieve expected regret of Ω L∗T (Λ0,T − 1) and the
                                                                    p             
number of leaders is exactly Λ0,T . As before, this implies an Ω L∗T (Λα,T − 1) as
well. The following theorem summarizes our lower bounds.

Theorem 4.11. Let T be a known time horizon.

  (i) For the branching setting and for any d < T , there is a random tree generation
      with dT = d such that the expected regret of any algorithm A satisfies E[RA,T ] =
         √      
      Ω T ln Π .

 (ii) For any N0,T ≤ 1 + ⌊log2 N ⌋ ≤ T , there is a random construction of N experts of
      which N0,T are distinct, such that the expected regret of any algorithm A satisfies
                   p              
      E[RA,T ] = Ω T (N0,T − 1) .

(iii) For any Λ0,T ≤ 1 + ⌊log2 N ⌋ ≤ cT , for some c > 0, there is a random construc-
      tion of N experts of which Λ0,T are leaders, such that the expected regret of any
                                        p              
      algorithm A satisfies E[RA,T ] = Ω T (Λ0,T − 1) .


4.7     Branching Experts for the Multi-Armed Bandit Set-
        ting

In this section we introduce and analyze a variant of the randomized multi-armed bandit
algorithm Exp3 of [8] for the branching setting. For the sake of simplicity, we focus
on the case of perfect cloning. This means that new actions j ∈ C(i, t + 1) all start
78            CHAPTER 4. REGRET MINIMIZATION FOR BRANCHING EXPERTS

off with the same cumulative loss Li,t as their parent i. This variant, called Exp3.C, is
described below here.


  Branching Exp3 (Exp3.C)

  Parameters: A sequence η1 , η2 , . . . of real-valued functions satisfying the assump-
  tions of Theorem 4.12.

  For each round t = 1, 2, . . .

         1. For each action i = 1, . . . , Nt−1 , after the adversary reveals the set C(i, t):
                               e j,0 = 0 for every j = 1, . . . , N1 ;
            If t = 1, then let L
            else, if t > 1, then L         e i,t−2 + e
                                 e j,t−1 = L                    1
                                                     li,t−1 + ηt−1 ln |C(i, t)| for every j ∈ C(i, t),
            including i.
                                                                                
         2. Compute the new distribution over actions pt = p1,t , . . . , pNt ,t , where
                                                                   
                                                 exp −ηt L e i,t−1
                                       pi,t = P                        .
                                                Nt              e k,t−1
                                                k=1 exp   −η  t L


         3. Draw an action It from the probability distribution pt and observe loss lIt ,t .
                                                                                li,t
         4. For each action i = 1, . . . , Nt compute the estimated loss e
                                                                         li,t =      I {It = i}.
                                                                                pi,t


The main modification with respect to Exp3 is in the way cumulative loss estimates
e i,t are computed (step 1 in the pseudo-code). The additional term 1 ln |C(i, t)| in
L                                                                  ηt−1

these estimates serves a role similar to that of the partial restart in the full information
case. There, we divided the weight of a parent expert i among children C(i, t). Here,
we increase the loss estimate of j ∈ C(i, t) to achieve the same effect.
    The next theorem bounds the expected regret of Exp3.C against an oblivious ad-
                                                       
versary.5 This is defined as E[RExp3.C,T ] = E LExp3.C,T − L∗T , where LExp3.C,T =
lI1 ,1 + · · · + lIT ,T is the random variable denoting Exp3.C’s total loss with respect to
the sequence I1 , . . . , IT of random draws.

Theorem 4.12. Let η1 , η2 , . . . be a sequence of functions ηt : N → R+ such that for
every k1 ≤ k2 ≤ . . ., it holds that η1 (k1 ) ≥ η2 (k2 ) ≥ . . . (in what follows, we write
ηt = ηt (Nt ) for short). If i0 , . . . , iT = m(T ) are the actions on the path from the root
     5
     Extensions to non-oblivious adversaries are possible, with some assumptions on the adversary’s
control on the quantities C(i, t).
4.7. BRANCHING EXPERTS FOR THE MULTI-ARMED BANDIT SETTING 79

to the best action m(T ), then

                               T                 T
                           1X         X 1     Nt |C(it , t + 1)| ln NT +1
           E[RExp3.C,T ] ≤    Nt ηt +      ln                   +         .                             (4.2)
                           2            ηt         Nt+1             ηT
                              t=1            t=1

                                 q
                                     ln ek
If Exp3.C is run with ηt (k) =        tk , then

                                                                      QT                        !
                              p                                  ln       t=1 |C(it , t + 1)|
             E[RExp3.C,T ] ≤ 2 T NT ln eNT                 1+                                       .   (4.3)
                                                                            2 ln eNT


Proof. Note first that if splits always occur uniformly for all actions i (i.e, for all t we
have that |C(i, t + 1)| is the same for all i = 1, . . . , Nt ), then Nt+1 = Nt |C(i, t + 1)|
                                
implying ln Nt |C(i, t + 1)| Nt+1 = 0. Hence we would get

                                                      T
                                                 1X         ln NT +1
                         E[RExp3.C,T ] ≤            Nt ηt +          .
                                                 2             ηT
                                                     t=1


In particular, for the standard bandit setting, where N1 = · · · = NT +1 = N , we get

                                                           T
                                                      NX      ln N
                             E[RExp3.C,T ] ≤             ηt +
                                                      2        ηT
                                                           t=1


and recover the original result.

   To prove (4.3) from (4.2), we first note that ln NNt+1
                                                       t
                                                          ≤ 0 for all t. In addition,
without loss of generality, NT = NT +1 (otherwise we add an artificial round). We
obtain
                         r                                            s
                     T                      T
                 1X      Nt ln eNt      1 X                               T NT (ln NT )2
 E[RExp3.C,T ] ≤                    +           ln |C(it , t + 1)| +
                 2           t         ηT                                    ln eNT
                   t=1                     t=1
                                 T          r                T
                 1p             X    1          T NT        Y                     p
               ≤     NT ln eNT      √ +                  ln     |C(it , t + 1)| + T NT ln eNT
                 2                    t        ln eNT
                                t=1                         t=1
                                    r                T
                  p                     T NT        Y
               ≤ 2 T NT ln eNT +                 ln     |C(it , t + 1)|
                                       ln eNT
                                                    t=1
                                           QT                      !
                  p                     ln t=1 |C(it , t + 1)|
               = 2 T NT ln eNT 1 +                                     ,
                                                2 ln eNT

                              PT         1
                                                 RT 1                 √
where we used the fact that        t=1
                                         √
                                           t
                                             ≤    0
                                                      √ dt = 2
                                                       t
                                                                          T.

   The proof of (4.2) is an adaptation of the proof of [21, Theorem 3.1], which is
80               CHAPTER 4. REGRET MINIMIZATION FOR BRANCHING EXPERTS

divided into five steps. Here we just focus on the main differences. In the following, we
write Ei∼pt to denote the expectation w.r.t. the random draw of i from the distribution
                                                                 
pt specified by the probability vector pt = p1,t , . . . , pNt ,t . Moreover, given any action
k ∈ NT , we use k also to index any action i on the path from the root to k. This is OK
because, since we have perfect cloning, we have that Lk,T = li1 ,1 + · · · + liT ,T , where
i1 , . . . , iT are the actions on the path from the root i0 to iT = k.

      The first two steps of the proof are identical to the proof in [21]:

                             T
                             X                T
                                              X              T
                                                             X                    T
                                                                                  X
                                   lIt ,t −         lk,t =         Ei∼pt e
                                                                         li,t −         EIt ∼pt e
                                                                                                lk,t .         (4.4)
                             t=1              t=1            t=1                  t=1


Now we rewrite Ei∼pt e
                     li,t as follows

                  1                                  1                  
      Ei∼pt e
            li,t = ln Ei∼pt exp −ηt e
                                    li,t − Ek∼pt e
                                                 lk,t − ln Ei∼pt exp −ηte
                                                                        li,t .                                 (4.5)
                  ηt                                    ηt

Following the second step in the proof in [21] we obtain

                                                                     η2
                               ln Ei∼pt exp −ηt (e
                                                 li,t − Ek∼pt e
                                                              lk,t ) ≤ t .                                     (4.6)
                                                                      2pIt ,t

Next, we study the second term in (4.5). This relies on the specific properties of
                                                             
                                           1 PNt+1        e
Exp3.C. Let Φ0 (η) = 0 and Φt (η) = η1 ln Nt+1 i=1 exp −η Li,t . By definition of pt ,
                   e j,t = L
and recalling that L       e i,t for every j ∈ C(i, t + 1) and every i = 1, . . . , Nt , we have

                                                                     
                                                                   P Nt                                 
                                                               exp   −η  t
                                                                             e i,t−1 exp −ηte
                                                                             L                      l i,t
                 1                                     1     i=1
            −       ln Ei∼pt exp −ηte
                                    li,t            = − ln        P Nt                      
                 ηt                                    ηt                             e
                                                                    i=1 exp −ηt Li,t−1
                                                           P Nt                                   
                                                                 |C(i, t +  1)|  exp    −η t
                                                                                             e i,t
                                                                                             L
                                                       1     i=1
                                                    = − ln      P Nt                      
                                                       ηt              exp    −η    e
                                                                                    L
                                                                  i=1              t i,t−1
                                                           PNt+1                   
                                                                   exp    −η   Le
                                                                              t i,t
                                                       1      i=1
                                                    = − ln P                        
                                                       ηt    Nt
                                                                 exp −ηt L   e i,t−1
                                                                      i=1
                                                                                        1    Nt
                                                    = Φt−1 (ηt ) − Φt (ηt ) +             ln    .              (4.7)
                                                                                        ηt Nt+1

Putting together (4.4), (4.5), (4.6) and (4.7) we obtain

T
X                T
                 X            T
                              X           T 
                                          X                         XT           T
                                                                                  X
                                 ηt                                     1    Nt
      lIt ,t −         lk,t ≤           +     Φt−1 (ηt ) − Φt (ηt ) +     ln    −   EIt ∼pt e
                                                                                            lk,t .
                                2pIt ,t                                 ηt Nt+1
t=1              t=1         t=1               t=1                                  t=1                  t=1
4.8. APPENDIX: ADDITIONAL CLAIMS                                                                    81

The first term is easy to bound in expectation since by the rule of conditional expec-
tations we have
                           T
                           X            T
                                        X                     T
                              ηt                   ηt       1X
                         E           =E   EIt ∼pt         =     Nt ηt .
                             2pIt ,t              2pIt ,t   2
                            t=1                         t=1                           t=1

For the second term we again proceed similarly to [21],

                 T                             −1
                 X                           TX                       
                       Φt−1 (ηt ) − Φt (ηt ) =    Φt (ηt+1 ) − Φt (ηt ) − ΦT (ηT )
                 t=1                                          t=1


since Φ0 (η1 ) = 0. Note that
                                                                                               
                                                                        NT +1              
                                     ln NT +1    1                      X
                  −ΦT (ηT ) =                 −    ln                 e i,T 
                                                               exp −ηT L
                                        ηT      ηT
                                                          i=1
                                     ln NT +1    1                 
                                   ≤          −    ln exp −ηT Lk,Te
                                        ηT      ηT
                                                 T                          
                                     ln NT +1 X e             1
                                   =          +      lk,t + ln |C(k, t + 1)| ,
                                        ηT                   ηt
                                                              t=1


and thus we have
                 " T               T
                                                #             T             T −1
                  X                X                  1X           X                       
             E          lIt ,t −         lk,t       ≤    Nt ηt + E   Φt (ηt+1 ) − Φt (ηt )
                                                      2
                  t=1              t=1                    t=1                   t=1
                                                        T
                                                        X     1     Nt |C(k, t + 1)| ln NT +1
                                                    +            ln                 +         .
                                                              ηt         Nt+1           ηT
                                                        t=1


The proof is concluded by showing that Φ′t (η) ≥ 0. Since ηt+1 ≤ ηt , this would give
Φt (ηt+1 ) − Φt (ηt ) ≤ 0. In fact, the proof of this claim goes along the same lines as the
proof in [21], and is therefore omitted.


4.8     Appendix: Additional Claims

Claim 4.13. There exists a scenario with N + 1 experts s.t. for a large enough N ,
                 p                                       p         
HedC has regret Ω L∗T N while Hedge has regret O ln N + L∗T ln N .

Proof. Consider the following special scenario. The adversary initially reveals N + 1
experts, one in every round, without any losses, in a comb-shaped branching tree. The
adversary next gives losses 0 to the last revealed expert and 1 to the others for t rounds,
and afterwards gives loss 1 to all experts for τ rounds. Suppose further that N , t, and
τ are known in advance.
82         CHAPTER 4. REGRET MINIMIZATION FOR BRANCHING EXPERTS
                                                                       p          
   We now consider the regret of HedC . We have L∗T = τ , so η = ln 1+ (2 ln 2)N/τ ,
                                                                       
and it is easily seen that the regret is lower bounded by 1 − pN +1,t+N t, where

                       2−N                    1           eηt
     pN +1,t+N = −N                  =                  ≤     = exp(ηt − N ln 2) .
                2   + (1 − 2−N )e−ηt   1 + (2N − 1)e−ηt   2N
                        
Taking t = (N ln 2 − 1)/η ensures the regret is lower bounded by t/2. Since

              N ln 2 − 1   N ln 2 − 1    (N/2) ln 2    p
                         ≥p            ≥p             ≥ N τ (ln 2)/8 ,
                  η        (2 ln 2)N/τ    (2 ln 2)N/τ

the result follows.

Lemma 4.14. If X = Z1 +. . .+Zn and Y = Zn+1 +. . .+Z2n , where Zi are independent
                                                                √
Bernoulli variables with p = 12 , then E[min{X, Y }] ≤ 21 n − 41 n.

Proof. We have that
                                                          
                                        1
                      E[min{X, Y }] = E (X + Y − |X − Y |)
                                        2
                                      1     1         1
                                    = E[X] + E[Y ] − E[|X − Y |]
                                      2     2         2
                                      n 1
                                    = − E[|X − Y |] ,
                                      2 2

so we need only determine the value of E[|X − Y |]. Now, σi = 2Zi − 1, for 1 ≤ i ≤ 2n,
are independent Rademacher variables, and 12 (σj − σj+n ) = Zj − Zj+n , for 1 ≤ j ≤ n.
                  P                         P
Thus, |X − Y | = | nj=1 (Zj − Zj+n )| = 12 | 2n
                                              i=1 ai σi |, where |ai | = 1 for every i. By

Khinchine’s inequality (see, e.g., [23], Lemma A.9),

                               " 2n           #       v
                                                      u 2n
                                 X                  1 u X       √
                           E          ai σi       ≥√ t     a2i = n .
                                i=1
                                                     2 i=1

Thus,
                                                            " 2n            #
                       n 1             n 1                    X                  1   1√
        E[min{X, Y }] = − E[|X − Y |] = − E                         ai σi       ≤ n−    n.
                       2 2             2 4                                       2   4
                                                              i=1
      Part II


Derivative Pricing




        83
84
Chapter 5


Background and Model

5.1     Introduction

In the second part of this work, we apply the robust methodology of regret minimization
to one of the most fundamental questions in finance: derivative pricing.
   A derivative is a security whose price is dependent on the price of one or more
underlying assets, for example, stocks. An important type of derivative is an option,
which is a financial instrument that allows its holder to buy or sell a certain asset for
a given price at a given time. For example, a European call option, at its expiration
time T , allows its holder to buy the asset for a price K, called the strike price. In other
words, the option pays max{ST − K, 0} at time T , where ST is the asset (stock) price
at time T . Another standard option is the European put option, which allows its holder
to sell the asset for a price K, or, equivalently, receive a payoff of max{K − ST , 0} at
time T . Buying such options enables stock holders to hedge their investments against
future rises or falls in the asset price. These options are also widely traded as securities
in their own right.
   Apart from the standard call and put options, there are numerous other option
types that are traded or developed to meet particular financial needs. Such options
are collectively known as exotic options. One example is the European fixed-strike
lookback call option, which, at its expiration time T , allows its holder to choose the
best time in hindsight to buy the asset for a price K. Namely, the lookback option
pays max{MT − K, 0} at time T , where MT is the maximal asset price over the lifetime
of the option.
   Derivative pricing has been greatly influenced, both theoretically and practically,

                                            85
86                                      CHAPTER 5. BACKGROUND AND MODEL

by the pricing formula and model of Black and Scholes [11] and Merton [68]. In their
Nobel Prize-winning works, they modeled the price of a stock as a geometric Brownian
motion stochastic process, and assumed an arbitrage-free market, namely, that market
prices provide no opportunities for riskless profit.

     The idea behind derivative pricing in the Black-Scholes-Merton (BSM) model is
as follows. Consider, for example, the pricing of a European call option. At every
time, there exists an amount of stock that together with a short position in one option
creates a risk-free portfolio. In an arbitrage-free market, the instantaneous return of
this portfolio is determined by the prevailing risk-free interest rate. These observations
may be used to derive a partial differential equation (the BSM equation) that together
with boundary conditions suited for the specific payoff of the European call option may
be solved to obtain an exact price. (For an exposition of pricing in the BSM model see,
e.g., [57].)

     The assumptions of the BSM model, however, have several known drawbacks. First,
the model is only an abstraction of price changes, while in reality prices are discrete and
experience sharp jumps, and the daily returns are neither independent nor identically
distributed. Second, the main parameter that is required, the stock volatility, is not
observable, and has to be estimated. In fact, calculating an implied volatility for the
BSM model based on actual market prices of European call options leads to different
values for different strike prices, even for a given expiration time.

     These empirical discrepancies motivated the introduction of an adversarial online
learning model for derivative pricing in the work of [35]. In their model, which we use
in this work as well, trading takes place in discrete time, and the market is assumed
to be adversarial. The only restrictions on a stock price consist of a bound on the sum
of the squared single-period returns of the stock (quadratic variation) and a bound on
its absolute single-period returns. An optional bound considered in [35], and which we
adopt, is an upper bound on the stock price. This model, which will be described in
Section 5.2, clearly accommodates the price jumps and dependence observed in real
markets.

     The authors of [35] showed that in an arbitrage-free market, regret minimization
algorithms may imply an upper bound on the price of the European call option. For this
purpose they specially modified an algorithm for the best expert setting, Polynomial
Weights [25], to work in a trading setting. Their price bounds feature the quadratic
5.2. THE MODEL                                                                                         87

variation of the stock price, and do not depend on the number of trading periods.
This property is highly desirable, since it allows the trading frequency to be increased
without an explicit effect on the price.
       In the following chapters, we present results that significantly widen the scope of
regret minimization-based pricing. In Chapter 6, we employ the regret minimization
component used in [35] to obtain price bounds in terms of the quadratic variation for
a variety of exotic derivatives. In Chapter 7, we combine this component with one-
way trading algorithmic components to obtain price bounds for fixed-strike lookback
options in particular. In Chapter 8, we obtain price bounds in terms of variation
using other regret minimization algorithmic components, by directly translating regret
bounds obtained for the best expert setting into a trading setting. The results of
Chapter 3, in particular, are shown to imply lower bounds on the price of certain call
options in terms of variation. These are the first such adversarial regret-based lower
bounds that are asymptotically optimal.



5.2        The Model

We consider a discrete-time finite-horizon model, with a risky asset (stock) and a risk-
free asset (bond or cash). The price of the stock at time t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , T } is St and
the price of the risk-free asset is Bt . Initially, B0 = S0 = 1. We assume that the price
of cash does not change, i.e., Bt = 1, which is equivalent to assuming a zero risk-free
interest rate. We further assume that we can buy or sell any real quantity of stocks with
no transaction costs. For the stock we denote by rt the single period return between
t − 1 and t, so St = St−1 (1 + rt ).
       A realization of the prices is a price path, which is the vector rt = (r1 , . . . , rt ). We
define a few parameters of a price path. We denote by M an upper bound on stock
prices St , by R an upper bound on absolute single-period returns |rt |, by Q an upper
                                 P
bound on the quadratic variation Tt=1 rt2 , and by Mt the maximum price up to time
t, Mt = max0≤u≤t {Su }.1 We will assume that the bounds R, Q, and M are given,
and ΠM,R,Q , or simply Π, will denote the set of all price paths satisfying these bounds.
   1
    The quadratic variation defined here is different from the quadratic variation used in Part I in two
ways. First, rt is not an additive concept of loss (or gain), but rather a multiplicative one. Second, the
quadratic variation here is defined for a sequence of scalars and is a property of an individual asset,
whereas in Part I it is defined for a sequence of loss vectors and is the property of a collection. In
Chapter 8 we revisit the additive setting of Part I and show that it is the relative quadratic variation
that is more relevant in a financial setting.
88                                                CHAPTER 5. BACKGROUND AND MODEL

                                                            √
We note that stock prices are always upper bounded by exp( QT ), as can be easily
                                                                          √
verified (see Lemma 7.16 in Section 7.6), and thus we may assume M ≤ exp( QT ).
                       P
Since max1≤t≤T {rt2 } ≤ Tt=1 rt2 < R2 T , we may assume that R2 ≤ Q ≤ R2 T (note
                                  √
that if Q < R2 we may set R = Q). The number of time steps, T , is influenced
both by the frequency of trading and the absolute time duration. For this reason it is
instructive to consider M and Q as fixed, rather than as increasing in T .
         A trading algorithm A starts with a total asset value V0 . At every time period
t ≥ 1, A sets weights ws,t ≥ 0 for stock and wc,t ≥ 0 for cash, and we define the
fractions ps,t = ws,t /Wt and pc,t = wc,t /Wt , where Wt = ws,t + wc,t . A fraction ps,t
of the total asset value, Vt−1 , is placed in stock, and likewise, pc,t Vt−1 is placed in
cash. Following that, the stock price St becomes known, the asset value is updated to
Vt = Vt−1 (1 + ps,t rt ), and time period t + 1 begins.
         We comment that since we assume that both weights are non-negative, the algo-
rithms we consider use neither short selling of the stock, nor buying on margin (negative
positions in cash). However, as part of the arbitrage-free assumption, we assume that
short selling is, in general, allowed in the market.
         An algorithm is referred to as one-way trading from stock to cash if the amount
of cash never decreases over time, i.e., for every t ≥ 1 we have pc,t Vt−1 ≤ pc,t+1 Vt ,
otherwise it is referred to as two-way trading.
         It is important to note that the above asset and trading model extends naturally to
several risky assets, and this extension will be applied in what follows. However, the
risky “assets” we will consider will be algorithms that trade in the same single stock and
cash (and might also be thought of as stock derivatives). Thus, such a multiple-asset
picture will, in fact, involve only one risky asset.
         We next define specific types of options referred to in this work:

     C A European call option C(K, T ) is a security paying max{ST − K, 0} at time T ,
           where K is the strike price and T is the expiration time.2

 LC A fixed-strike lookback call option LC(K, T ) is a security paying max{MT − K, 0}
           at time T .

EX An exchange option EX(X1 , X2 , T ) allows the holder to exchange asset X2 for
           asset X1 at time T , making its payoff max{X1,T − X2,T , 0}. A European call
     2
         We will sometimes refer to C(K, T ) simply as a call option.
5.2. THE MODEL                                                                            89

           option C(K, T ) is a special case of an exchange option, where X1 is the stock and
           X2 is a sum of K in cash.

 SH A shout option SH(K, T ) allows its holder to “shout” and lock in a minimum
           value for the payoff at one time 0 ≤ τ ≤ T during the lifetime of the option. Its
           payoff at time T is, therefore, max{ST − K, Sτ − K, 0}. (If the holder does not
           shout, the payoff is max{ST − K, 0}, identical to the payoff of C(K, T ).)

AP An average price call option AP(K, T ) is a type of Asian3 option that pays
           max{S̄T −K, 0} at time T , where S̄T may be either the arithmetic or the geometric
           mean of the stock’s prices. To distinguish between these two possibilities, we
           will denote APA (K, T ) for the option whose payoff is max{S̄TA − K, 0}, where
                    1 PT
           S̄TA = T +1  t=0 St is the arithmetic mean, and APG (K, T ) for the option whose
                                                     Q            1
           payoff is max{S̄TG − K, 0}, where S̄TG = ( Tt=0 St ) T +1 is the geometric mean.

 AS An average strike call option AS(T ) is a type of Asian option that allows its
           holder to get the difference between the final stock price and the average stock
           price, namely, a payoff of max{ST − S̄TA , 0}.

We will use bold text for denoting securities and plain text for denoting their values at
time 0. For example, we write SH(K, T ) for the value of the option SH(K, T ) at time
0.
         The above options are a special case of stock derivatives whose value at time T is
some function of rT , the price path of the underlying stock.4 A European call option
is an example of a path-independent derivative, since its payoff of max{ST − K, 0}
depends only on the price at time T . Lookback and Asian options are path-dependent
derivatives, since their payoff depends on the entire price path of the stock.
         Most of the options listed above have a payoff of the form max{XT − K, 0} where
XT > 0 is the value of some derivative at time T . We will use the term call option
on a derivative to refer to all such options, and the notation C(X, K, T ) for an option
that pays max{XT − K, 0} at time T . Note that if XT is restricted to some interval
[mX , MX ], then the interesting range for K is [mX , MX ). The reason is that K ≥ MX
implies that the payoff is always 0, so C(X, K, T ) = 0, and for K < mX , C(X, K, T ) =
C(X, mX , T ) + mX − K. We may thus assume that for European call options, average
     3
         Involving averaging over asset values.
     4
         Except for the shout option.
90                                     CHAPTER 5. BACKGROUND AND MODEL

price call options, and shout options, K ∈ [0, M ), and for lookback options, K ∈
[S0 , M ).


5.2.1        Arbitrage-Free Bounds

We assume that the pricing is arbitrage-free, which is defined as follows. Trading
algorithm A1 dominates trading algorithm A2 w.r.t. the set of price paths Π, if for
every price path in Π, the final value of A1 is at least the final value of A2 . The
arbitrage-free assumption says that if A1 dominates A2 , then the initial value of A1 is
at least the initial value of A2 . This assumption is natural, because if it is violated,
it becomes possible to make a riskless profit by buying into A1 and selling A2 . The
resulting flow of funds from A2 to A1 affects the stock price in a way that causes even
a small arbitrage opportunity to quickly disappear.
     For example, define trading algorithm ALC , which simply buys the fixed-strike
lookback option and holds it.     Its initial value is LC(K, T ) and its final value is
max{MT − K, 0}. (We would sometimes refer to ALC as simply the option LC(K, T ).)
Assume we design a trading strategy A1 whose initial value is V0 , and its value at
time T always satisfies VT ≥ max{MT − K, 0}. This means that A1 dominates ALC .
Therefore, by the arbitrage-free assumption, we have that LC(K, T ) ≤ V0 .
Chapter 6


Pricing Exotic Derivatives

6.1       Pricing Based on Multiplicative Regret

There is a fundamental connection between pricing derivatives and trading algorithms,
implied by the arbitrage-free assumption. Given a trading algorithm that dominates
the payoff of a derivative, its setup cost is an upper bound on the initial price of the
derivative. Similarly, if a trading algorithm is always dominated by the payoff of a
derivative, its setup cost is a lower bound on the initial price of the derivative. That
said, in this chapter and the next we will consider only upper bounds. We will return
to lower bounds in Chapter 8.
      Our bounds will be based on the connection, established in [35], between arbitrage-
free pricing and the notion of multiplicative regret. We now proceed to describe a useful
extension of their result.
      Consider n derivatives, X1 , . . . , Xn . Let X1,t , . . . , Xn,t be their values at time t, and
assume Xi,T > 0 for every 1 ≤ i ≤ n. We now consider an option that pays the maximal
value of a set of given derivatives.1 More specifically, we will denote Ψ(X1 , . . . , Xn , T )
for an option that pays max{X1,T , . . . , Xn,T } at time T , and Ψ(X1 , . . . , Xn , T ) for its
value at time 0.


Definition 6.1. Let A be a trading algorithm with initial value V0 = 1, and let
β1 , . . . , βn > 0. The algorithm A is said to have a (β1 , . . . , βn ) multiplicative regret
w.r.t. derivatives X1 , . . . , Xn if for every price path and every 1 ≤ i ≤ n, VT ≥ βi Xi,T .


  1
      Equivalently, this option is a call on the maximum with a zero strike price.


                                                   91
92                                       CHAPTER 6. PRICING EXOTIC DERIVATIVES

Lemma 6.2. If there exists a trading algorithm with a (β1 , . . . , βn ) multiplicative regret
w.r.t. derivatives X1 , . . . , Xn , then Ψ(X1 , . . . , Xn , T ) ≤ 1/β, where β = min1≤i≤n {βi }.

Proof. We have that VT ≥ β max1≤i≤n {Xi,T }, therefore, the payoff of the algorithm
dominates β units of the option Ψ(X1 , . . . , Xn , T ). By the arbitrage-free assumption,
Ψ(X1 , . . . , Xn , T ) ≤ 1/β.

     Moreover, the lemma indicates exactly how improved regret bounds for a trading
algorithm relate to tighter upper bounds on Ψ(X1 , . . . , Xn , T ).


6.2      Price Bounds for a Variety of Options

In order to obtain concrete price bounds, we require a specific trading algorithm whose
multiplicative regret bounds we can plug into Lemma 6.2. We use an adaptation of the
Polynomial Weights algorithm [25] called Generic, which was introduced in [35] and is
defined as follows.

  The Generic Algorithm
  Parameters: A learning rate η > 0 and initial weights wi,1 > 0, 1 ≤ i ≤ n.
  For each round t = 1, . . . , T
                                                            Pn
      1. Define fractions pi,t = wi,t /Wt , where Wt =         i=1 wi,t .


      2. For each asset i = 1, . . . , n, let wi,t+1 = wi,t (1 + ηrt ).

     It is important to note that in this section we consider derivatives that are tradable.
Crucially, such derivatives may represent the wealth resulting from investing with some
trading algorithm. We will define specific tradable derivatives later for pricing specific
options. Let X1 , . . . , Xn be such derivatives, where ri,T = (ri,1 , . . . , ri,T ) is the price
                                                                                 √
path of Xi , for 1 ≤ i ≤ n. We will require that |ri,t | < R < 1 − 1/ 2 ≈ 0.3, and
PT     2
  t=1 ri,t ≤ Qi , for every 1 ≤ i ≤ n. We will assume Xi,0 > 0 for every 1 ≤ i ≤ n,

which implies that the derivatives have positive values at all times.

Theorem 6.3. ([35]) Assume X1,0 = . . . = Xn,0 = 1. Let VT be the final value of
the Generic algorithm investing one unit of cash in X1 , . . . , Xn with initial fractions
                                   1−2R
p1,1 , . . . , pn,1 , and η ∈ [1, 2R(1−R) ]. Then for every 1 ≤ i ≤ n,

                                               1
                                    VT      η
                                         ≥ pi,1 e−(η−1)Qi Xi,T .
6.2. PRICE BOUNDS FOR A VARIETY OF OPTIONS                                                93

                                           1−2R
    In what follows, we will write ηmax = 2R(1−R) for short. We can now derive a bound
on Ψ(X1 , . . . , Xn , T ).

Theorem 6.4. For every η ∈ [1, ηmax ],

                                                      n
                                                                              !1
                                                      X                 η
                                                                               η

                          Ψ(X1 , . . . , Xn , T ) ≤          eη(η−1)Qi Xi,0        .
                                                      i=1

                                          −1
Proof. For every 1 ≤ i ≤ n, define X′i = Xi,0 Xi , namely, a fraction of Xi with value 1
at time 0. Applying Theorem 6.3 to these new assets, we have that for every 1 ≤ i ≤ n,

                                   1                     1
                                                                      −1
                      VT         η
                              ≥ pi,1 e−(η−1)Qi Xi,T
                                                ′      η
                                                    = pi,1 e−(η−1)Qi Xi,0 Xi,T .

                    1/η       −1
Denoting βi = pi,1 e−(η−1)Qi Xi,0 and β = min1≤i≤n {βi }, we have by Lemma 6.2 that
Ψ(X1 , . . . , Xn , T ) ≤ 1/β. For any fixed η, we may optimize this bound by picking a
probability vector (p1,1 , . . . , pn,1 ) that maximizes β. Clearly, β is maximized if β1 =
                                                                                          η
. . . = βn = c for some constant c > 0. This is equivalent to having pi,1 = cη eη(η−1)Qi Xi,0
for every 1 ≤ i ≤ n. To ensure that (p1,1 , . . . , pn,1 ) is a probability vector, we must
         P                η −1/η
set c = ( ni=1 eη(η−1)Qi Xi,0 )  . We thus have that Ψ(X1 , . . . , Xn , T ) ≤ 1/β = 1/c =
 Pn η(η−1)Qi η 1/η
( i=1 e         Xi,0 ) .

    We next utilize the bound on Ψ(X1 , . . . , Xn , T ) to bound the price of various exotic
options, as well as the ordinary call option.

Theorem 6.5. For every η ∈ [1, ηmax ], the following bounds hold:

                                     η                η 1/η
    • EX(X1 , X2 , T ) ≤ (eη(η−1)Q1 X1,0 + eη(η−1)Q2 X2,0 ) − X2,0

    • SH(K, T ) ≤ (K η + 2eη(η−1)Q S η0 )1/η − K

    • LC(K, T ) ≤ (K η + T eη(η−1)Q S0η )1/η − K

    • AS(T ) ≤ S0 (e(η−1)Q+(ln 2)/η − 1)

Proof. Throughout this proof, we use the notation X3 = X1 + X2 to indicate that the
payoff of the derivative X3 is always equal to the combined payoffs of the derivatives
X1 and X2 . Equivalently, we will write X2 = X3 − X1 . We point out that by the
arbitrage-free assumption, equal payoffs imply equal values at time 0. Therefore, we
have that X3,0 = X1,0 + X2,0 .
94                                       CHAPTER 6. PRICING EXOTIC DERIVATIVES

     • Since EX(X1 , X2 , T ) = Ψ(X1 , X2 , T ) − X2 , we have that EX(X1 , X2 , T ) =
                                 P                η 1/η
       Ψ(X1 , X2 , T ) − X2,0 ≤ ( 2i=1 eη(η−1)Qi Xi,0 ) − X2,0 , where the inequality is by
       Theorem 6.4.

     • Let X1 be the stock. Let X2 be an algorithm that buys a single stock at time
       0, and if the option holder shouts, sells it immediately. In addition, let X3 be
       K in cash (implying Q3 = 0). Note that the quadratic variations of both X1
       and X2 are upper bounded by Q. Since SH(K, T ) = Ψ(X1 , X2 , X3 , T ) − X3 ,
                                                     P                η 1/η
       we have by Theorem 6.4 that SH(K, T ) ≤ (K η + 2i=1 eη(η−1)Qi Xi,0 ) −K ≤
       (K η + 2eη(η−1)Q S η0 )1/η − K.

     • Let Xt be an algorithm that buys a single stock at time 0 and sells it at time
       t, 1 ≤ t ≤ T . Thus, the quadratic variation of Xt is upper bounded by Q
       for every t. In addition, let X′ be K in cash. We have that LC(K, T ) =
       Ψ(X′ , X1 , . . . , XT , T ) − X′ , where we used the fact that S0 ≤ K. By Theo-
       rem 6.4, LC(K, T ) = Ψ(X′ , X1 , . . . , XT , T ) − K ≤ (K η + T eη(η−1)Q S0η )1/η − K.

     • For the bound on AS(T ), let X1 be the stock and let X2 be an algorithm that buys
                                                        1
       a single stock at time 0 and sells a fraction T +1 of the stock at each time 0 ≤ t ≤ T .
                                       1   P  T
       We thus have that X2,T = T +1          t=0 St . Denote by Q2 an upper bound on the

       quadratic variation of X2 . Since AS(T ) = EX(X1 , X2 , T ), then by our bound
       on EX(X1 , X2 , T ), we have that AS(T ) ≤ (eη(η−1)Q S0η + eη(η−1)Q2 S0η )1/η − S0 =
                                                                   1 Pt              T −t
       S0 ((eη(η−1)Q + eη(η−1)Q2 )1/η − 1). For every t, X2,t = T +1     τ =0 Sτ + T +1 St ,

       therefore,

                           1 Pt             T −t              1        T −t     T +1−t
                         T +1    τ =0 Sτ + T +1 St          T +1 St + T +1 St − T +1 St−1
         |r2,t | =      1 Pt−1           T +1−t
                                                   −1   =       1 Pt−1         T +1−t
                      T +1    τ =0 Sτ + T +1 St−1            T +1    τ =0 Sτ + T +1 St−1

                          T +1−t                    T +1−t
                           T +1 |St − St−1 |         T +1 |St − St−1 |
                =      1 Pt−1         T +1−t
                                                  ≤     T +1−t
                                                                       = |rt | .
                     T +1   τ =0 Sτ +  T +1  St−1        T +1  St−1

               PT    2
                             PT    2
       Thus,    t=1 r2,t ≤    t=1 rt ≤ Q, and we may assume Q2 = Q. We therefore have

       that AS(T ) ≤ S0 [(2eη(η−1)Q )1/η − 1], and the result follows.




     Since an ordinary call is actually EX(X1 , X2 , T ), where X1 is the stock and X2 is
K in cash, we can derive the following bound from [35]:
6.2. PRICE BOUNDS FOR A VARIETY OF OPTIONS                                                95

Corollary 6.6. ([35])           The price of a European call option satisfies C(K, T ) ≤
                                      1/η
min1≤η≤ηmax        K η + S0η eη(η−1)Q      − K.

   For the average strike option we can optimize for η explicitly:

Corollary 6.7. The price of an average strike call option satisfies AS(T ) ≤
                                                          p
S0 (e(ηopt −1)Q+(ln 2)/ηopt − 1), where ηopt = max{1, min{ (ln 2)/Q, ηmax }}.

   We note that the above bound has different behaviors depending on the value
of Q. The bound has a value of S0 (e(ηmax −1)Q+(ln 2)/ηmax − 1) for Q < (ln 2)/ηmax
                                                                                2   ,
    √
S0 (e 4Q ln 2−Q − 1) for (ln 2)/ηmax
                                 2   ≤ Q < ln 2, and (a trivial) S0 for Q ≥ ln 2.


Average Price Call Options

Average price call options provide a smoothed version of European call options by
averaging over the whole price path of the stock, and they are less expensive than
European call options. To allow a counterpart of this phenomenon in our model, we
will allow the quadratic variation parameter Q to depend on time. More specifically,
                                             P
we will assume that Qt is an upper bound on tτ =1 rτ2 , so Q1 ≤ . . . ≤ QT .
   We start with a simple bound that relates the price of average price options to the
price of ordinary call options and lookback options.

Theorem 6.8. The prices of average price call options satisfy

                                                         T
                                                     1 X
                   APG (K, T ) ≤ APA (K, T ) ≤           C(K, t) ≤ LC(K, T ) .
                                                   T +1
                                                        t=0


Proof. We have that

              T
              Y                             T                 T
                       1
                                     1 X            1 X
                    StT +1 − K ≤         St − K ≤       max{St − K, 0} ,
                                   T +1           T +1
              t=0                           t=0               t=0


where the first inequality is by the inequality of the arithmetic and geometric means.
We thus have that
      (T                    )           (        T
                                                            )       T
       Y         1
                                              1 X                1 X
               T +1
max           St      − K, 0    ≤ max              St − K, 0 ≤        max {St − K, 0} ,
                                            T +1               T +1
        t=0                                       t=0                 t=0


                                                                    1        PT
and by the arbitrage-free assumption, APG (K, T ) ≤ APA (K, T ) ≤ T +1           t=0 C(K, t).
96                                       CHAPTER 6. PRICING EXOTIC DERIVATIVES

Since max{St − K, 0} ≤ max{MT − K, 0} for every t, we also have that

                                  T
                         1 X
                             max{St − K, 0} ≤ max{MT − K, 0} ,
                       T +1
                               t=0


                  1    PT
and, therefore, T +1      t=0 C(K, t) ≤ LC(K, T ).




     Using the bound of Corollary 6.6 on the price of call options in conjunction with the
above theorem, we may obtain a concrete bound for both types of average price calls.
However, its dependence on the sequence Q1 , . . . , QT is complicated. We therefore
proceed with a more involved derivation that, in the case of APG (K, T ), will yield a
simpler and more meaningful bound. This bound is obtained in a more general context,
which is described next.

      Consider n assets, X1 , . . . , Xn , with returns ri,t , for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, 1 ≤ t ≤ T , satisfying
                 P
|ri,t | ≤ Ri and tτ =1 ri,τ
                         2 ≤ Q . We assume w.l.o.g. that the initial values of all assets
                                    i,t

are 1. Given a probability vector a = (a1 , . . . , an ), we will consider a trading algorithm
that maintains a constant fraction ai of its wealth invested in asset Xi , for each i, by
rebalancing its holdings on every round. Such an algorithm is known as a constantly
rebalanced portfolio (CRP), and we denote P = P(a, X1 , . . . , Xn ) for the algorithm and
r̂t for its return at time t. Since

                            n                                          n
                                                                                       !
                            X                                          X
                     Pt =         ai Pt−1 (1 + ri,t ) = Pt−1     1+          ai ri,t       ,
                            i=1                                        i=1

                     Pn
we have that r̂t =      i=1 ai ri,t , and by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality,



                   |r̂t | ≤ kak2 k(r1,t , . . . , rn,t )k2 ≤ kak2 k(R1 , . . . , Rn )k2 .

                                             Pt        2      2
                                                                   Pn
By the first inequality, we also have           τ =1 r̂τ ≤ kak2       i=1 Qi,t . Thus, we may treat P
                                                                                               Pn
as a single risky asset with bounds R̂ = kak2 k(R1 , . . . , Rn )k2 and Q̂ = kak22              i=1 Qi,T

on its absolute returns and quadratic variation, respectively.

     One last property that will be required in bounding APG (K, T ) relates the geometric
6.2. PRICE BOUNDS FOR A VARIETY OF OPTIONS                                                                             97

average of asset wealths to the wealth of a uniformly distributed CRP:

       n
       Y                 n Y
                         Y T                               T Y
                                                           Y n                          T
                                                                                        Y  n
               1/n                                                                        1X
             Xi,T    =             (1 + ri,t )1/n =                  (1 + ri,t )1/n ≤                    (1 + ri,t )
                                                                                               n
       i=1               i=1 t=1                           t=1 i=1                      t=1        i=1

                         T                   n
                                                     !
                         Y          1X
                     =           1+    ri,t                = PT (a, X1 , . . . , Xn ) ,
                                    n
                         t=1                i=1


for a = (1/n, . . . , 1/n), where the inequality is due to the inequality of the arithmetic
                                                                 P
and geometric means, and the last equality holds since r̂t = ni=1 ai ri,t . With all these
elements handy, we can now derive the desired bound.

                                           PT                      q
                         1                                              T                    1−2R̂
Theorem 6.9. Let Q̂T = T +1                   t=1 Qt , R̂ =            T +1 R, and η̂max = 2R̂(1−R̂) .            It holds
that

                                                                                      1
                                                                K η + S0η eη(η−1)Q̂T
                                                                                          η
                     APG (K, T ) ≤                min                                         −K .
                                            1≤η≤η̂max


Proof. For i = 0, . . . , T , define asset Xi as holding the stock until time i and then
selling it. The option APG (K, T ) is equivalent to a call option on the geometric
mean of these assets. As already observed, this geometric mean is upper bounded
                                           1              1
by PT (a, X0 , . . . , XT ), where a = ( T +1 , . . . , T +1 ), and therefore it suffices to upper
bound the initial price of the option C(P(a, X0 , . . . , XT ), K, T ). By definition of the
assets, Ri = R and Qi,T = Qi for i 6= 0, and R0 = Q0 = 0. Thus, denoting the
single-period returns of the CRP by r̂t , we have that
                                                                                       r
                                                                        − 21    1               T
                |r̂t | ≤ kak2 k(R0 , . . . , RT )k2 ≤ (T + 1)                  T R=
                                                                                2                  R,
                                                                                              T +1

and
                               T
                               X                     T
                                                     X                          T
                                                                        1 X
                                      r̂τ2 ≤ kak22         Qi,T =           Qt .
                                                                      T +1
                               τ =1                  i=0                       t=1

Plugging these values into the bound of Corollary 6.6 for the price of a call option
completes the proof.


    Since η̂max ≥ ηmax , the above expression does not exceed the bound of Corollary 6.6
with Q̂T as the value of the quadratic variation. In other words, APG (K, T ) is upper
bounded by the bound for a regular European call option with the averaged quadratic
variation, which, depending on Q1 , . . . , QT , may be significantly smaller than QT .
98                                     CHAPTER 6. PRICING EXOTIC DERIVATIVES

     We conclude by comparing the bound of Theorem 6.9 with the bound based on
averaging call option prices (Theorem 6.8), if we price the call options using the bound
of Corollary 6.6. The fact that each call option bound may be minimized by a different
value of η makes this comparison difficult. However, if the same value of η is used for
all the call options, we may show that the bound of Theorem 6.8 cannot be superior.

                                      PT                  q
                        1                                        T                    1−2R̂
Lemma 6.10. Let Q̂T = T +1             t=1 Qt , R̂ =            T +1 R, and η̂max = 2R̂(1−R̂) .   It holds
that

                                                          1 X η                    
                                                                     T
                                  1                                            1
       min    (K η + eη(η−1)Q̂T ) η − K ≤        min          (K + eη(η−1)Qt ) η − K .
  1≤η≤η̂max                                    1≤η≤ηmax T + 1
                                                                    t=0


Proof. Let a ≥ 0, b > 0, and η ≥ 1, and denote f (x) = ln(a + bx ). Then
                          x                     
                   ′′     b ln b ′           a ln b ′ abx (ln b)2
                 f (x) =           = ln b −          =            ≥0,
                          a + bx            a + bx     (a + bx )2

so f is convex and so is (1/η) · f = ln(a + bx )1/η . Thus, (a + bx )1/η is log-convex
and therefore convex. Taking a = K η , b = eη(η−1) and subtracting K we have that
(K η + eη(η−1)x )1/η − K is convex in x, and as a result,

                              1
                                                                     1   PT        1
                                                    K η + eη(η−1) T +1     t=0 Qt
                                                                                     η
             (K η + eη(η−1)Q̂T ) η − K =                                                 −K

                                                  1 X η                    
                                                          T
                                                                       1
                                           ≤          (K + eη(η−1)Qt ) η − K ,
                                                T +1
                                                          t=0


                                                                   1−2R
where we define Q0 = 0. It is easily verified that the expression 2R(1−R) is decreasing
in R, and therefore R̂ < R implies [1, ηmax ] ⊆ [1, η̂max ], and the result follows.



6.3      Convex Path-Independent Derivatives

In this section we move beyond specific options, and provide adversarial price bounds
for a general class of derivatives. For this purpose, we add a new assumption to our
model, namely, that the final stock price, ST , has finite resolution. We thus assume that
ST ∈ P = {j∆p : 0 ≤ j ≤ N }, where ∆p = M/N , for some N > 2. This assumption
mirrors the situation in reality.
     It is a well-known result from finance, that exact pricing of European call options
yields exact pricing for every path-independent derivative of a stock [20]. This result
6.3. CONVEX PATH-INDEPENDENT DERIVATIVES                                                   99

relies on the fact that every derivative is equivalent to a portfolio of call options with
various strike prices.
                                                   (1)                         (1)
   Formally, for any f : P → R, we define f∆p : P \ {M } → R as f∆p (p) = f (p+∆p)−f
                                                                               ∆p
                                                                                     (p)

      (2)                            (2)
and f∆p : P \ {0, M } → R as f∆p (p) = f (p+∆p)−2f (p)+f (p−∆p)
                                                 ∆p2
                                                                . The next lemma and
theorem follow immediately from a result in [20].

Lemma 6.11. ([20]) Define gK : P → R as gK (p) = max{p − K, 0}. For every p ∈ P,

                                                          −∆p
                                                         MX
                                     (1)                          (2)
             f (p) = f (0) + f∆p (0) · g0 (p) +                  f∆p (K) · gK (p) · ∆p .
                                                         K=∆p


   Note that gK (p) is the payoff of C(K, T ) and that, in addition, C(0, T ) = S0 ,
because the payoff of C(0, T ) is equivalent to a single stock. We thus get the following
theorem:

Theorem 6.12. ([20]) Let X be a path-independent derivative with payoff f : P → R.
The initial value of X is given by

                                                   −∆p
                                                  MX
                                  (1)                      (2)
               X =       f (0) + f∆p (0) · S0 +           f∆p (K) · C(K, T ) · ∆p .
                                                  K=∆p


   In the BSM model, where an exact pricing of call options is known, this amounts
to pricing all path-independent derivatives exactly. In our model, however, where only
upper bounds on call option prices are available, we cannot utilize this relation in every
                               (2)
case. We must have that f∆p (K) ≥ 0 for every K in order to substitute those upper
bounds for the terms C(K, T ). This requirement is fulfilled by convex derivatives.

Theorem 6.13. Let X be a path-independent derivative with payoff f : P → R, where
f is the restriction to P of some convex function f¯: [0, M ] → R. Let C(K, T ) ≤ U (K)
for every K ∈ P, where U : P → R. Then

                                                    −∆p
                                                   MX
                                   (1)                      (2)
                X ≤       f (0) + f∆p (0) · S0 +           f∆p (K) · U (K) · ∆p .
                                                   K=∆p


                                                             (2)
Proof. By Theorem 6.12, it is enough to show that f∆p (K) ≥ 0 for every K ∈ [∆p, M −
∆p]. By the convexity of f¯, f (K) = f ( 12 (K − ∆p) + 12 (K + ∆p)) ≤ 21 f (K − ∆p) +
1                      f (K+∆p)−2f (K)+f (K−∆p)
2 f (K + ∆p), and thus           ∆p2
                                                ≥ 0.
100                                                 CHAPTER 6. PRICING EXOTIC DERIVATIVES


                                 3


                                2.5


                                 2


                                1.5


                      Payoff     1


                                0.5


                                 0


                               −0.5


                                −1
                                      0   0.5   1    1.5   2       2.5       3   3.5   4    4.5   5
                                                               Stock Price




Figure 6.1: The payoff of a long strangle investment strategy as a function of the stock
price, for K1 = 2, K2 = 3.


An Example: a Long Strangle Strategy

A long strangle investment strategy involves the purchase of a put option with a strike
price of K1 and a call option with a strike price of K2 , where K1 < K2 . The payoff of
this strategy is max{K1 − ST , 0} + max{ST − K2 , 0}, which is a convex function of ST
(see Figure 6.1). By Theorem 6.12, the value of a long strangle is K1 − S0 + C(K1 , T ) +
C(K2 , T ). Denoting Cu (K, T ) for the bound of Corollary 6.6, we can upper bound the
price of a long strangle by K1 − S0 + Cu (K1 , T ) + Cu (K2 , T ).



6.4     Discussion of the Bounds

Comparison       to             standard            portfolio           selection.         The problem of pricing
Ψ(X1 , . . . , Xn , T ) may be viewed as a portfolio selection problem with a reference class
of n alternative strategies. For example, in the case of lookback options, n = T + 1,
and the strategies are holding cash or selling the stock at some time t, for 1 ≤ t ≤ T .
Working with this simple reference class, we can achieve better regret bounds than
those given w.r.t. superior benchmarks such as the best CRP. Consider a naı̈ve buy
and hold algorithm that initially divides capital equally between the alternative strate-
gies, performing no further action. This algorithm has a (1/n, . . . , 1/n) multiplicative
regret w.r.t. the n strategies. In standard portfolio selection terminology, where regret
is defined as the logarithm of the ratio between the final wealth of the best strategy
in the reference class and the final wealth of the algorithm, the naı̈ve algorithm has a
6.4. DISCUSSION OF THE BOUNDS                                                            101

regret upper bound of ln n. In comparison, the universal portfolio’s (optimal) bound
                                     Γ(1/2)    n
w.r.t. the best CRP is n−1
                        2 ln 2T + ln Γ(n/2) + o(1) (see, e.g., [23]). In the case of look-

back options, we get an Ω(T ) regret bound, which grows arbitrarily large as the trading
frequency increases. The problematic dependence on T persists even if n is small, for
example, in the case of call options, where n = 2 (the alternatives are holding cash or
holding the stock). More recent algorithms [28, 48] replaced the dependence on T with
different notions of variation of the single-period returns (different from quadratic vari-
ation). Their bounds are a great improvement over the previous bound, under realistic
conditions where the variation is much smaller than T . Nevertheless, the bound of [48]
is still lower bounded by the naı̈ve bound of ln n, for every n, while the bound given
in [28] is Ω(n ln n) (although we note that the constant is not clear from their result).
Therefore, the regret bounds w.r.t. the best CRP cannot be used directly to achieve
interesting upper bounds on the price of Ψ options.


Bounds for average price call options.             Average price call options are less expen-
sive than European call options in practice due to the smoothing effect of the price
averaging. In the BSM model it is possible to derive an analytic pricing formula only
in the case of geometric averaging. Interestingly, the BSM price of such an option is
equivalent to the price of a European call option on an asset with a volatility parameter
                                             √
that is smaller by a multiplicative factor of 3 (see, e.g., [57]).2
      The quadratic variation plays a similar role to the volatility in our model. The result
of Theorem 6.9 upper bounds APG (K, T ) in terms of the call option price where the
quadratic variation is replaced by its averaged value. That in itself does not necessarily
provide a meaningful improvement over the price of a European call option, since all the
quadratic variation may be concentrated in the first few rounds, causing the averaged
value and the final value of the quadratic variation to be roughly the same.
      We may therefore consider a reasonable model of gradual growth in the quadratic
                                                                    −a
variation, by assuming a bound on Qt that grows linearly, as a + QTT−1 · (t − 1), where
a is a parameter. (The assumption becomes more robust as a grows, until for a = QT
we recover our original model.) It holds that

                               T
                        1 X        1  T             1
                            Qt ≤     · · (a + QT ) ≤ (a + QT ) ,
                      T +1       T +1 2             2
                              t=1

  2
      This asset also pays a dividend.
102                                        CHAPTER 6. PRICING EXOTIC DERIVATIVES


                            0.4
                                                                Option Payoff
                                                                Profit from Investment
                                                                Payoff minus Profit
                            0.3




                            0.2




                            0.1
               Cash / S0




                             0




                           −0.1




                           −0.2




                           −0.3
                             1950   1960   1970   1980   1990       2000             2010
                                                  Year




Figure 6.2: A breakdown of the option writer’s cash flow, for average strike call options,
in terms of option payoff, option price, and total profit from the algorithm’s trading.
Data is calculated for 1-year average strike call options on the S&P 500 index for the
years 1950-2010, with R = 0.15 and Q = 0.1. For the option writer to make a profit,
the payoff minus profit line must be below the option price, which is 0.53 in this setting.
Note that the “hindsight” empirical price is 0.25.


where we simply summed an arithmetic sequence. Thus, the smoothed quadratic vari-
ation featured in Theorem 6.9 is bounded by (a + QT )/2 rather than QT . If a ≪ QT ,
the value is about half the original quadratic variation of the stock.



6.5       Empirical Results

In order to examine our results empirically, we consider the S&P 500 index data for
the years 1950-2010. (The results are plotted in Figure 6.2.) We computed a price for
a 1-year average strike call option using our bound, with R = 0.15 and Q = 0.1. These
R and Q values hold for all years but two in the test. In addition, for each year we
computed the payoff of an average strike call option and also ran the Generic algorithm
and computed the total profit. We used a single value of η, namely, the optimal value
for the price bound. The stock prices for each year were normalized so that S0 = 1 at
the beginning of the year.
      It is instructive to compare our upper bound on the option price, which was calcu-
lated to be 0.53, to the net payoff. The net payoff is the difference between the payoff
to the option holder (always non-negative) and the profit (or loss) the algorithm made
in trading. It can be seen that our option price dominates the net payoff for every year,
6.5. EMPIRICAL RESULTS                                                               103

with the maximal net payoff at 0.25.
   We point out that our empirical results are influenced by the fact that we assume
a zero risk-free interest rate, while the interest rates pertaining to the data used were
positive and variable.
Chapter 7


A Closer Look at Lookback
Options

7.1     Revisiting Multiplicative Regret

Recall the payoff of a fixed-strike lookback option, which is max{MT −K, 0}, or equiva-
lently, max{K, S1 , . . . , ST }−K, since K ≥ S0 . Thus, if we define Xt to be an algorithm
that buys a single stock at time 0 and sells it at time t, 1 ≤ t ≤ T , and X to be holding
K in cash, then LC(K, T ) = Ψ(X, X1 , . . . , XT , T ) − K. If we have a trading algorithm
that starts with V0 = 1 and guarantees VT ≥ α and VT ≥ βt Xt,T , 1 ≤ t ≤ T , for every
price path (which we defined as having an (α/K, β1 , . . . , βT ) multiplicative regret w.r.t.
X, X1 , . . . , XT ), then we obtain by Lemma 6.2 that

                                              1
                        LC(K, T ) ≤                              −K .
                                      min{α/K, β1 , . . . , βT }

Observe that if we substitute a single value β = min{α, β1 , . . . , βT } for all values βt ,
we only weaken our requirements without weakening the bound. The guarantees now
become VT ≥ max{α, βMT }, and we have LC(K, T ) ≤ 1/ min{α/K, β} − K. It is
therefore convenient to use an adjusted definition of multiplicative regret in the context
of lookback options, as follows:

Definition 7.1. Let A be a trading algorithm and let Vt be its asset value at time
0 ≤ t ≤ T , assuming V0 = 1. The algorithm A is said to have an (α, β) multiplicative
regret, for some α, β > 0, if for every price path, VT ≥ max{α, βMT }.

   We thus have the following bound on the price of lookback options:

                                             104
7.2. SIMPLE ARBITRAGE-FREE BOUNDS                                                         105

Lemma 7.2. If an algorithm with (α, β) multiplicative regret exists, then

                                              1
                          LC(K, T ) ≤                −K .
                                         min{α/K, β}


7.2     Simple Arbitrage-Free Bounds

We start with a few simple arbitrage-free bounds. Let AT S be a trading algorithm that
starts with T stocks (initial value S0 T ) and sells one stock at each time t ∈ [1, T ]. Since
                          P
the final value of AT S is Tt=1 St ≥ MT − S0 ≥ MT − K, we have that

Theorem 7.3. The algorithm AT S dominates LC(K, T ), implying that


                                  LC(K, T ) ≤ T S0 = T .


   A similar strategy AT C uses ordinary call options rather than stocks. It buys one call
                                                          P
option for each expiration time t ∈ [1, T ] (initial value Tt=1 C(K, t)) and simply collects
                                                P
the payoffs. Since the final value of AT C is Tt=1 max{St − K, 0} ≥ max{MT − K, 0},
we have that

Theorem 7.4. The algorithm AT C dominates LC(K, T ), therefore,

                                               T
                                               X
                                 LC(K, T ) ≤         C(K, t) .
                                               t=1


   While the previous strategies were time-oriented, the next strategy is price-oriented.
The algorithm AP S starts with N = 1 + ⌊log2 (M/K)⌋ stocks, and, therefore, has an
initial value of N S0 . It sells stock i, i ∈ [0, N − 1], at the first time St ≥ 2i K. (This
strategy is very similar to one discussed in [36].)

Theorem 7.5. The algorithm AP S dominates LC(K, T ), and


                         LC(K, T ) ≤ N S0 = 1 + ⌊log2 (M/K)⌋ .


Proof. Let c be the total wealth obtained from selling stocks. If no stock is sold, then
c = 0 ≥ max{MT − K, 0} = 0. Otherwise, let i0 = ⌊log2 (MT /K)⌋ be the highest
index of a stock that was sold. We will prove that c ≥ 2i0 +1 K − K, and then, since
2i0 +1 K − K ≥ MT − K = max{MT − K, 0}, the proof would be complete. We proceed
106                    CHAPTER 7. A CLOSER LOOK AT LOOKBACK OPTIONS

by induction on i0 . If i0 = 0, then c ≥ K = 2i0 +1 K − K. We assume correctness for
values smaller than i0 and prove for i0 . If another stock is sold at the same time as
stock i0 , then c ≥ 2 · 2i0 K ≥ 2i0 +1 K − K. If stock i0 is sold alone, then applying the
induction assumption to stock i0 −1, and adding the wealth at the time stock i0 −1 was
sold, we have c ≥ (2i0 K − K) + 2i0 K = 2i0 +1 K − K, and the induction is complete.



7.3       Combining Regret Minimization and One-Way Trad-
          ing

The simple algorithms reveal what is required of an algorithm to dominate LC(K, T ).
Such an algorithm must always set aside enough cash to cover the payoff of the option.
In the vicinity of record highs, cash reserves may need to be increased by selling stocks.
At the same time, enough stocks must be retained in case even higher price levels are
reached.
      The problem may also be seen as that of predicting the point where the stock price
reaches a maximum. We may think of a set of experts, each with its own selling trigger
as a function of market conditions, where the job of the algorithm is to choose the best
expert. This casts the problem in the best expert and regret minimization frameworks.
Such a formulation turns out to be equivalent to a conventional regret minimization
algorithm working with stock and cash, combined with a one-way trading mechanism.
      Our algorithm thus contains both a regret minimization element and a one-way
trading element. This combination will enable us to bound the regret w.r.t. stock prices
over the whole price path of the stock. This is in contrast to performing conventional
regret minimization, which would only bound the regret w.r.t. the final stock price. At
the same time, this approach is also a generalization of regret minimization with stock
and cash, because by picking an inactive one-way trading element, we can obtain an
ordinary regret minimization algorithm.
      We define our trading algorithm using two parameters, a one-way trading rule and a
regret minimization rule. Intuitively, the one-way trading rule will move funds gradually
from stock to cash, while the regret minimization rule will try to follow whichever asset
is performing better, stock or cash (using a regret minimization algorithm).
      The one-way trading rule is defined by a function h mapping histories to [0, 1]. We
require that h be monotonically non-increasing along a price path, i.e., if rt is a prefix
7.3. COMBINING REGRET MINIMIZATION AND ONE-WAY TRADING                                            107

of rt+1 then h(rt ) ≥ h(rt+1 ). In addition, h will start at 1, i.e., h(r0 ) = 1. In the
algorithm we will use the notation Ht = h(rt−1 ), so that 1 = H1 ≥ H2 ≥ . . . ≥ 0, and
H = (H1 , . . . , HT +1 ). If we set Ht = 1 for every t, we will essentially not transfer funds
from stock to cash.
   The regret minimization rule performs regret minimization between stock and cash.
It is defined by the update equations ws,t+1 = ws,t f (rt ), and wc,t+1 = wc,t , where
f : ∪t≥1 Rt → R+ . In what follows, we use f (rt ) = 1 + ηrt , which is the regret
minimization rule of the Polynomial Weights algorithm [25], as adapted in [35]. We
                                                1−2R
                                                                            √
will require that η ∈ [1, ηmax ], where ηmax = 2R(1−R) , and that R < 1 − 1/ 2 ≈ 0.3. In
Section 7.4 we will show that η = 1 has the interpretation of a buy and hold strategy,
namely, the regret minimization rule maintains its initial allocation of stock and cash.
                                   Q
For convenience, we denote g(rt ) = tu=1 f (ru ), for the accumulated update of f .
   We now give the exact definition of our family of trading algorithms. Initially,
wc,1 , ws,1 > 0, and for t ≥ 1,

                          Ht+1
          ws,t+1 = ws,t        f (rt ) = ws,1 Ht+1 g(rt ) ,
                           Ht
          wc,t+1   = wc,t + ws,1 (Ht − Ht+1 )g(rt ) = wc,t + ws,t f (rt ) − ws,t+1 .


Recall that a trading algorithm invests a fraction ws,t /(ws,t + wc,t ) of assets in stock,
and the rest in cash. We assume that initially, V0 = 1. The following lemma relates the
current weights to the initial weights, using the stock price, the variation parameter Q
and the one-way trading rule.

Lemma 7.6. For every η ∈ [1, ηmax ], it holds that


                   ws,t+1 ≥ Ht+1 ws,1 Stη e−η(η−1)Q ,
                                                           t
                                                           X
                                               −η(η−1)Q
                   wc,t+1 ≥ wc,1 + ws,1 e                        (Hu − Hu+1 )Suη .
                                                           u=1

                                                                            Qτ               Qτ
Proof. We first observe that for every 1 ≤ τ ≤ T , since g(rτ ) =            u=1 f (ru ) =    u=1 (1+

ηru ), we have that

                    τ
                    X                        τ
                                             X                              τ
                                                                            X
     ln g(rτ ) =          ln(1 + ηru ) ≥ η         ln(1 + ru ) − η(η − 1)         ru2
                    u=1                      u=1                            u=1
                                        τ
                                        X
               = η ln Sτ − η(η − 1)           ru2 ≥ ln Sτη − η(η − 1)Q = ln Sτη e−η(η−1)Q ,
                                        u=1
108                           CHAPTER 7. A CLOSER LOOK AT LOOKBACK OPTIONS

where the first inequality uses the fact that for every η ∈ [1, ηmax ] and r > −R,
ln(1 + ηr) ≥ η ln(1 + r) − η(η − 1)r2 (see [35]). Thus, for every 1 ≤ τ ≤ T , g(rτ ) ≥
Sτη e−η(η−1)Q . We therefore have that

                     t
                Y ws,u+1   Y Hu+1         t
       ws,t+1                               Ht+1
              =          =        f (ru ) =      g(rt ) ≥ Ht+1 Stη e−η(η−1)Q ,
        ws,1       ws,u       Hu             H1
                    u=1                 u=1


for the weight of stock, and

                             t
                             X                                t
                                                              X
          wc,t+1    = wc,1 +   (wc,u+1 − wc,u ) = wc,1 + ws,1   (Hu − Hu+1 )g(ru )
                                    u=1                                          u=1
                                              t
                                              X
                    ≥ wc,1 + ws,1                   (Hu − Hu+1 )Suη e−η(η−1)Q
                                              u=1
                                                           t
                                                           X
                                              −η(η−1)Q
                    = wc,1 + ws,1 e                              (Hu − Hu+1 )Suη ,
                                                           u=1


for the weight of cash. Both inequalities used our lower bound on g(rτ ).




      The following theorem lower bounds the profit of the algorithm in terms of H, and
facilitates the proof of (α, β) multiplicative regret results for given one-way trading
rules.



Theorem 7.7. For every η ∈ [1, ηmax ],

                                                          T
                                                                                              !! η1
                                                          X
           VT ≥      pc,1 + ps,1 e−η(η−1)Q                      (Ht − Ht+1 )Stη + HT +1 STη           .
                                                          t=1


Proof. We have that

                             T
                             X                        T                              T
            WT +1                     Wt+1 X wc,t+1 + ws,t+1 X wc,t + ws,t f (rt )
         ln              =         ln     = ln              = ln
             W1                        Wt          Wt                Wt
                             t=1                     t=1                           t=1
                             XT                                         T
                                                                        X
                                 wc,t + ws,t (1 + ηrt )
                         =         ln                   =     ln(1 + ηps,t rt )
                                         Wt
                           t=1                            t=1
                           XT                      X     T
                                            Vt                        Vt
                         =     ln 1 + η          −1      ≤      η ln      = η ln VT ,
                                          Vt−1                       Vt−1
                             t=1                                          t=1


where the inequality uses the fact that for every η ∈ [1, ηmax ] and r > −R, ln(1 + ηr) ≤
7.3. COMBINING REGRET MINIMIZATION AND ONE-WAY TRADING                                                        109

η ln(1 + r) (see [35]). On the other hand, we have that

       WT +1              wc,T +1 + ws,T +1
  ln            = ln
        W1                       W1
                                                                T
                                                                                                            !!!
                           1                                    X
                ≥ ln             wc,1 + ws,1 e−η(η−1)Q                (Ht − Ht+1 )Stη + HT +1 STη
                           W1
                                                                t=1
                                                      T
                                                                                           !!
                                                      X
                = ln pc,1 + ps,1 e     −η(η−1)Q
                                                            (Ht − Ht+1 )Stη + HT +1 STη                 ,
                                                      t=1


where the inequality is by Lemma 7.6. Together, we have that

                                                     T
                                                                                          !!
                                                     X
        η ln VT ≥ ln pc,1 + ps,1 e     −η(η−1)Q
                                                           (Ht − Ht+1 )Stη + HT +1 STη              ,
                                                     t=1


and, rearranging, we get the desired result.



7.3.1     A Price-Oriented Rule and Bound

The one-way trading rule presented in this subsection is reminiscent of the simple
algorithm AP S in that it depends only on the maximal price so far, Mt . Like AP S ,
unless the price is at an all-time high, this rule does not trigger a sale of stocks, i.e.,
Ht+1 = Ht . However, the combined trading algorithm may still sell stocks at any price
level due to the regret minimization rule.


Lemma 7.8. Using Ht = ln(M/µt−1 )/ ln(M/K), where µt = max{K, Mt }, the algo-
                                                                          1/η
rithm achieves an (α, β) multiplicative regret with α = pc,1 , and

                                        1                            !1 
                                       pη          ps,1  e−η(η−1)Q    η
                                          c,1
                             β = min            ,                               .
                                       K            η ln(M/K)            


Proof. From Theorem 7.7 we have that

                      "                             T
                                                                                        !# η1
                                                    X
               VT ≥ pc,1 + ps,1 e−η(η−1)Q                 (Ht − Ht+1 )Stη + HT +1 STη           .            (7.1)
                                                    t=1


                                                                 1/η
Since H1 ≥ . . . ≥ HT +1 ≥ 0, we have that VT ≥ pc,1 = α, which proves the α part of
the (α, β) multiplicative regret. For the β part, we consider two cases. If MT ≤ K,
                1/η       1/η
then VT ≥ pc,1 ≥ pc,1 K −1 MT ≥ βMT , as required. We now assume MT > K. From
110                            CHAPTER 7. A CLOSER LOOK AT LOOKBACK OPTIONS

Equation 7.1 we get

                                                                             T
                                                                                                   ! η1
                                                                      1      X               µt
                      VT ≥         pc,1 + ps,1 e−η(η−1)Q                           Stη ln                 ,              (7.2)
                                                                  ln(M/K)                   µt−1
                                                                             t=1


by definition of Ht and using the fact that HT +1 ≥ 0. The values µt form a non-
decreasing sequence, and we have that µT = MT > K = µ0 . Let µηT = xl > xl−1 >
. . . > x0 = µη0 be the distinct values of µηt , 0 ≤ t ≤ T , for some l ≥ 1. Note that
                                                                                                              µη
Stη ln µµt−1
          t
             = 0 if µt = µt−1 , and Stη ln µµt−1
                                              t
                                                 = µηt ln µµt−1
                                                             t
                                                                = η1 · µηt ln µηt                                   otherwise.
                                                                                                              t−1

Therefore,

              T
              X                     X     l
                              µt             xi
          η         Stη ln        =   xi ln      ≥ xl − x0 = µηT − µη0 = MTη − K η ,
                             µt−1           xi−1
              t=1                        i=1


where the inequality is true since for every z0 , . . . , zn > 0, we have that
Pn
  i=1 zi ln(zi /zi−1 ) ≥ zn − z0 (see Lemma 7.17 in Section 7.6). Plugging this into

Equation 7.2 gives

                                                                                            !1
                                                      ps,1 e−η(η−1)Q                         η

                              VT    ≥          pc,1 +                MTη − K η                     .
                                                       η ln(M/K)

                     ps,1 e−η(η−1)Q
Denoting γ =           η ln(M/K) , we have

                                                                                                1
                                                                  1       pc,1 − γK η             η
                VT      ≥       (pc,1 − γK       η
                                                     ) + γMTη η =                      +γ              · MT .
                                                                               MTη

If pc,1 − γK η ≥ 0, then VT ≥ γ 1/η MT ≥ βMT , as required. Otherwise, since MT > K,
we have that
                                                                                             1
                                                1                               1        η
                          pc,1 − γK η                η           pc,1 − γK η        η       pc,1
                                      +γ                 ≥                   +γ         =          ,
                              MTη                                     Kη                     K

                                   1/η
and, therefore, VT ≥ (pc,1 /K) · MT ≥ βMT , and the proof is complete.




      This multiplicative regret result implies a new bound on LC(K, T ).



Theorem 7.9. For η ∈ [1, ηmax ], LC(K, T ) ≤ (K η + S0η ηeη(η−1)Q ln M
                                                                     K)
                                                                        1/η − K.
7.3. COMBINING REGRET MINIMIZATION AND ONE-WAY TRADING                                               111

Proof. Recall that S0 = 1. Combining Lemmas 7.2 and 7.8, we have that

                                                  1
                          LC(K, T ) ≤                    −K ,
                                             min{α/K, β}

            1/η                    1/η                           ps,1 e−η(η−1)Q
where α = pc,1 and β = min{pc,1 /K, γ 1/η }, denoting γ =          η ln(M/K) . Since α/K ≥ β,
                                                 −1/η
we have LC(K, T ) ≤ 1/β − K = max{Kpc,1 , γ −1/η } − K. We now optimize for pc,1 =
                      −1/η
1−ps,1 . The term Kpc,1      is decreasing in pc,1 , while the term γ −1/η is increasing in pc,1 .
                                                                                     −1/η
Thus, to minimize the bound, we would like to pick pc,1 such that Kpc,1                     = γ −1/η . It
is easy to verify that pc,1 = (1 + K −η ηeη(η−1)Q ln(M/K))−1 satisfies this requirement,
and is also in [0, 1], and thus a valid choice. Therefore,

                       −1
                                                              1
        LC(K, T ) ≤ Kpc,1η − K = K · 1 + K −η ηeη(η−1)Q ln(M/K) − K
                                                                η


                                            1
                      K η + ηeη(η−1)Q ln(M/K) − K .
                                              η
                  =




7.3.2    Bounds Based on Competitive Ratio

For every one-way trading rule h, and every η ∈ [1, ηmax ], we may define

                                                    MTη
                   ρh (η) = sup PT                        η          η   .
                               Π         t=1 (Ht − Ht+1 )St + HT +1 ST

                                                                                 T
Namely, ρh (η) is the competitive ratio of h w.r.t. the sequence {Stη }t=1 . Assume ρ̄h is
a known upper bound on ρh , so ρ̄h (η) ≥ ρh (η) for every η ∈ [1, ηmax ] (if ρh is known
explicitly, then ρ̄h = ρh ). We next bound LC(K, T ) in terms of ρ̄h (η).


Theorem 7.10. Let h be the one-way trading rule used in the trading algorithm. For
every η ∈ [1, ηmax ], there is a choice of pc,1 for which the trading algorithm has a
(βK, β) multiplicative regret, and, therefore, LC(K, T ) ≤ 1/β − K, where

                                                                         !− 1
                     K η − S0η + S0η eη(η−1)Q ρ̄h (η) (1 − (K/M )η )         η

              β=                                                                 .
                                      1 − (S0 /M )η


Proof. Recall that S0 = 1. Denote b = e−η(η−1)Q ρ̄h (η)−1 and p = pc,1 for convenience.
112                       CHAPTER 7. A CLOSER LOOK AT LOOKBACK OPTIONS

By definition of ρ̄h (η) and by Theorem 7.7,

                                                        1                         1
           VT ≥ (p + (1 − p)e−η(η−1)Q ρ̄h (η)−1 MTη ) η = (p + (1 − p)bMTη ) η .


Thus, we have that VT ≥ (p + (1 − p)b)1/η = (p(1 − b) + b)1/η , and, in addition,

                                      1                   1
              VT ≥ MT pM −η + (1 − p)b η = MT p M −η − b + b η .


We therefore have an (α, β) multiplicative regret with α = (p(1 − b) + b)1/η and β =
                                                      1
(p(M −η − b) + b)1/η . By Lemma 7.2, LC(K, T ) ≤ min{α/K,β} − K. Define p0 =
       (K η −1)b
(K η −1)b+1−(K/M )η .    Since 1 ≤ K < M , we have that p0 ∈ [0, 1], so we may pick
p = p0 . It can be easily verified that, given this choice, α/K = β, and, therefore,
LC(K, T ) ≤ 1/β − K, and

                                                                                 !− 1
                              −η
                                         1        K η − 1 + 1b (1 − (K/M )η )        η

            β =         p0 (M − b) + b η =
                                                           1 − M −η
                                                                   !− 1
                         K η − 1 + eη(η−1)Q ρ̄h (η)(1 − (K/M )η )      η

                =                                                        .
                                        1 − M −η




      For η = 1, the above bound becomes simpler:

                                                            M −K
Corollary 7.11. If η = 1, then LC(K, T ) ≤ S0 (ρ̄h (1) − 1) M −S0 .


      Setting Ht ≡ 1, the principle used in the proof of Theorem 7.10 can be utilized to
improve the upper bound for C(K, T ) stated in Corollary 6.6.


Theorem 7.12. For every η ∈ [1, ηmax ],

                                                            1
                 C(K, T ) ≤ K η + S0η eη(η−1)Q (1 − (K/M )η ) − K .
                                                              η




Proof. The theorem holds trivially for K = 0, so assume K > 0. Setting Ht ≡ 1 and
denoting b = e−η(η−1)Q , we have by Theorem 7.7 that VT ≥ (pc,1 + ps,1 bSTη )1/η . This
                        1/η
implies that VT ≥ pc,1 and also that


                 VT ≥ ST (pc,1 ST−η + ps,1 b)1/η ≥ ST (pc,1 M −η + ps,1 b)1/η .
7.4. DISCUSSION OF THE BOUNDS                                                          113

                  1/η
Denoting α = pc,1 and β = (pc,1 M −η +(1−pc,1 )b)1/η , we thus have VT ≥ max{α, βST }.
                                K b η
We will use the value p = K η b+1−(K/M )η as our choice for pc,1 . This choice is valid,

since 0 < K < M , and therefore p ∈ [0, 1]. We now have that

  K η βη   K η p(M −η − b) + K η b     η    −η          η     K η b + 1 − (K/M )η
         =                         = K   (M    − b) + K   b ·                     =1,
   αη                 p                                                Kηb

or α = βK, yielding that VT ≥ β max{ST , K}, or equivalently, that (1/β)VT − K ≥
max{ST − K, 0}. Since the r.h.s. of the last inequality is the payoff of C(K, T ), we
may obtain directly by the arbitrage-free assumption that C(K, T ) ≤ 1/β − K. Since

                       η                   1
       1        K       K b + 1 − (K/M )η η                                  1
              =    =             η
                                                · K = K η + (1 − (K/M )η )b−1 η
       β        α              K b
                                              1
                  K η + (1 − (K/M )η )eη(η−1)Q
                                                 η
              =                                    ,


the result follows (recalling that S0 = 1).



7.4     Discussion of the Bounds

Direction of trading: one-way versus two-way.            The algorithm family of Section
7.3 combines regret minimization and one-way trading components. We would like to
show that in general, this results in two-way trading algorithms, although we may set
the parameter η so as to obtain a one-way trading algorithm. The analysis applies
also to the trading algorithm of [35], which corresponds to the special case where the
one-way trading component is inactive, i.e., Ht ≡ 1.
   The dynamics of our algorithms are an interplay between the dynamics of their
two components. However, whenever Ht+1 = Ht , the only active element is the regret
minimization component f (rt ), making the dynamics easier to characterize. Note that
for any h, simply cashing in less frequently can guarantee that Ht+1 = Ht often,
without changing the essential workings of the algorithm. For Ht = ln(M/µ t−1 )
                                                                     ln(M/K) , the

price-oriented rule used in Theorem 7.9, we have that Ht+1 = Ht if the stock price is
not at a new all-time high. The following claim gives a characterization of the direction
of trading.

Lemma 7.13. For any f (rt ), if Ht+1 = Ht , then the sign of f (rt ) − 1 − rt determines
the direction of trading at time t + 1. If f (rt ) = 1 + ηrt , then for η = 1 the algorithm
114                        CHAPTER 7. A CLOSER LOOK AT LOOKBACK OPTIONS

is one-way trading; for η > 1, if Ht+1 = Ht , the algorithm buys stocks when prices rise
and sells stocks when prices drop.

Proof. Denote by Ns,t the number of stocks at time t. Since Ns,t = ps,t Vt−1 /St−1 and


                         Vt = Vt−1 (ps,t (1 + rt ) + pc,t ) = Vt−1 (1 + ps,t rt ) ,


we have

           Ns,t+1          ps,t+1 Vt St−1            ws,t+1 Wt                       1
                     =            ·         ·      =        ·   · (1 + ps,t rt ) ·
            Ns,t            ps,t Vt−1 St              ws,t Wt+1                    1 + rt
                           Ht+1                Wt 1 + ps,t rt
                     =           · f (rt ) ·       ·          .
                            Ht                Wt+1   1 + rt

Noting that wc,t+1 = wc,t + ws,t f (rt ) − ws,t+1 , we have


                         Wt+1 = wc,t + ws,t f (rt ) = Wt (pc,t + ps,t f (rt )) ,


and therefore,

                    Ns,t+1         Ht+1                     1             1 + ps,t rt
                              =         · f (rt ) ·                     ·
                     Ns,t           Ht              pc,t + ps,t f (rt )     1 + rt
                                                                                   −1
                                   Ht+1      1 + (f (rt ) − 1)            1 + rt
                              =         ·                           ·
                                    Ht 1 + ps,t (f (rt ) − 1)           1 + ps,t rt
                                   Ht+1 ξ(f (rt ) − 1)
                              =         ·                  ,
                                    Ht         ξ(rt )

              1+x
where ξ(x) = 1+p s,t x
                       . We always have wc,t > 0, implying that ps,t < 1, so it can be
easily verified that ξ(x) is increasing in x. Thus, if Ht+1 = Ht , then f (rt ) > 1 + rt
implies Ns,t+1 > Ns,t , f (rt ) < 1 + rt implies Ns,t+1 < Ns,t , and f (rt ) = 1 + rt implies
Ns,t+1 = Ns,t . This means that for f (rt ) = 1 + ηrt with η > 1, given that Ht+1 = Ht ,
the algorithm buys stocks iff rt > 0 and sells stocks iff rt < 0.
      Finally, for f (rt ) = 1 + rt , Ns,t+1 /Ns,t = Ht+1 /Ht ≤ 1, so the algorithm is one-way
trading.


Relation to the search and one-way trading problems.                            Any one-way trading
algorithm h may be used in our configuration. In particular, Theorem 7.10 shows how
the competitive ratio characteristics of h determine the multiplicative regret of our
algorithm. In particular, it shows that improving ρh (η), the competitive ratio of h
7.4. DISCUSSION OF THE BOUNDS                                                         115

                           T
w.r.t. the sequences {Stη }t=1 , improves the multiplicative regret of the two-way trading
algorithm.
   A one-way trading algorithm with optimal competitive ratio is derived in [36], in
a scenario where only an upper bound M and a lower bound M/ϕ on the stock price
are known, and T trades are allowed. The optimal competitive ratio ρ∗ = ρ∗ (T, ϕ) is
defined by (ϕ−1)(1−ρ∗ /T )T +1 = ρ∗ . Equivalently, this implies an (α, β) multiplicative
regret with β = 1/ρ∗ .
   In our model we deviate in two important ways from their model. First, we introduce
an additional parameter that bounds the quadratic variation, Q, and second, we allow
for two-way trading. Therefore, it is not surprising that for certain settings we may
improve on their optimal competitive ratio.
   More specifically, we apply Theorem 7.10, taking h to be the optimal one-way
trading algorithm, and setting K = 1. The theorem states that for any η ∈ [1, ηmax ]
we may attain a (β(η), β(η)) multiplicative regret, where β(η) = e−(η−1)Q ρh (η)−1/η .
For η = 1 we have β(1) = 1/ρh (1), which means that our algorithm attains the same
competitive ratio as h. Thus, showing that β ′ (1) > 0 would imply that β(η) > β(1) =
1/ρh (1) for η in some interval (1, η0 ), namely, an improvement over the competitive
ratio of h. Since
                         ∂ ln β(η)        1             1 ρ′h (η)
                                   = −Q + 2 ln ρh (η) −           ,
                            ∂η           η              η ρh (η)

and ln x is increasing in x, we have that β ′ (1) > 0 if

                                                ρ′h (1)
                                  ln ρh (1) −           >Q.
                                                ρh (1)

This last condition may be seen to hold for specific values of ϕ and Q (by means of
numeric computation, due to the implicit definition of ρh (η)). In general, bigger values
of ϕ and smaller values of Q make for bigger improvements.


Comparison to the simpler bounds.               We now show that the price-oriented bound
of Theorem 7.9 is superior to the bounds of the simple algorithms of Section 7.2 and
also to the bound given in Theorem 6.5. For algorithms AT S and AP S , which are clearly
one-way trading, we will show that the price-oriented bound is superior even when we
set η = 1 (and thus have a one-way trading algorithm).
   The bound for AP S is 1 + ⌊log2 (M/K)⌋, while, for η = 1, Theorem 7.9 gives a
116                         CHAPTER 7. A CLOSER LOOK AT LOOKBACK OPTIONS

bound of ln(M/K). We have that


          ln(M/K) = log2 (M/K) · ln 2 ≈ 0.69 log2 (M/K) < 1 + ⌊log2 (M/K)⌋ .


        If we make no extra assumptions on the growth of Q over time, then the bound
of Theorem 7.9 is superior to the call option-based bound of AT C , where we use the
bound of Theorem 7.12 on the price of call options. This is summarized in the following
lemma.


Lemma 7.14. If T > 1, then for any η ∈ [1, ηmax ],

                         1       "                    η  1   #
                        M  η                              K      η
     K η + ηeη(η−1)Q ln      −K <T    K η + eη(η−1)Q 1 −           −K .
                        K                                 M


Proof. By the concavity of ζ(y) = y 1/η for η ≥ 1, we have that for any y > 0,

                                                                           1     
     1           1   T − 1 η η1                     1             T −1 η      η          y  η1
       (K η + y) η +      (K ) ≤                      (K η + y) +     K           = Kη +        ,
     T                 T                            T               T                    T

and rearranging, we have
                                                                                
                                       1                              y  η1
                           (K η + y) η − K ≤ T ·               Kη +          −K       .
                                                                      T

Picking y = T eη(η−1)Q (1 − (K/M )η ) yields

                                          1                                                  1        
      η       η(η−1)Q              η        η                    η     η(η−1)Q              η     η
    K + Te              (1 − (K/M ) )           −K ≤ T ·        K +e             (1 − (K/M ) )        −K       .


It is now enough to show that for T > 1 and for any valid η,

                                 1                                           1
        K η + ηeη(η−1)Q ln(M/K)            − K < K η + T eη(η−1)Q (1 − (K/M )η ) − K , (7.3)
                                       η                                         η




or equivalently, that η ln(M/K) < T (1 − (K/M )η ). Denoting x = (K/M )η , we have
that M −η ≤ x < 1, and defining ξ(x) = T (1 − x) + ln x, it is left to show that ξ(x) > 0
for x ∈ [M −η , 1). It holds that ξ ′ (x) < 0 iff x > 1/T , so since ξ(1) = 0, we have
that ξ(x) > 0 for x ∈ [1/T, 1). Assume then that x ∈ [M −η , 1/T ). If M −η ≥ 1/T
we are done, so assume that M −η < 1/T . It is left to show that ξ(M −η ) > 0. Since
                                                                    √
η < 1/(2R) and by our model assumptions Q ≤ R2 T and M ≤ exp( QT ), we have
7.4. DISCUSSION OF THE BOUNDS                                                          117

that
                                                 p
                      − ln(M −η ) = η ln M ≤ η       QT ≤ ηRT < T /2 .

Therefore,

                                                                 T  T T
        ξ(M −η ) = T (1 − M −η ) + ln(M −η ) > T (1 − 1/T ) −      ≥ − =0,
                                                                 2  2 2

completing the proof.


   The above proof in fact yields the stronger result given in Equation 7.3, for T > 1
and any η ∈ [1, ηmax ]. The r.h.s. of that equation is clearly smaller than the bound
                                               1/η
given in Theorem 6.5, namely, K η + T eη(η−1)Q      − K. The strict inequality is easily
seen to hold for T = 1 as well, since

                                        p
             η ln(M/K) ≤ η ln M ≤           QT /(2R) ≤ RT /(2R) = T /2 < T ,


and thus we have:

Lemma 7.15. For any η ∈ [1, ηmax ], the price-oriented bound is strictly better than
the bound of Theorem 6.5.

   Finally, for the special case η = 1, Lemma 7.15 implies that the price-oriented
bound is strictly better than T , the bound of AT S .


Comparison to the work of Dawid et al.                The work of [34] priced options whose
payoff is F (MT ), for a class of functions F . The function F (x) = max{x − K, 0}, which
describes a fixed-strike lookback option, does not belong in that class, and therefore
their results cannot be applied here. However, their methodology still suggests a one-
way trading algorithm for dominating this option, and it coincides with our price-
oriented rule. It is easy to verify that our ln(M/K) bound may not be improved by
this approach, as follows. For the price path rt = (ln M )/T , 1 ≤ t ≤ T , we have that
                                                         P
MT = (1 + (ln M )/T )T ≤ M , and as T → ∞, |rt | → 0, Tt=1 rt2 → 0, and MT → M ,
satisfying arbitrary parameters R, Q, and M . As T grows, the wealth obtained by
                                                                          RM
investing a sum of ln(M/K) with the price-oriented rule alone converges to K xd ln x,
which equals M −K. Thus, at least ln(M/K) in cash is required to dominate LC(K, T )
with this strategy.
118                                 CHAPTER 7. A CLOSER LOOK AT LOOKBACK OPTIONS


                            0.6
                                                                  Option Payoff
                                                                  Profit from Investment
                                                                  Option Price
                            0.5
                                                                  Payoff Minus Profit


                            0.4



                            0.3
               Cash / S0




                            0.2



                            0.1



                             0



                           −0.1



                           −0.2
                             1950     1960   1970   1980   1990       2000             2010
                                                    Year




Figure 7.1: The plot gives a breakdown of the option writer’s cash flow in terms of
option payoff, option price, and profit from the algorithm’s trading. Data is calculated
for 1-year lookbacks on the S&P 500 index for the years 1950-2010, with K = 1,
R = 0.15, Q = 0.1, and M = 1.5. The option writer makes a profit if the payoff minus
profit line is below the option price line. (Note that the “hindsight” empirical price is
0.314 while our bound gives 0.399.) The calculated BSM price is 0.129.


7.5       Empirical Results

In order to examine our bounds empirically, we again consider the S&P 500 index data
for the years 1950-2010, which was used in the empirical examination of average strike
call options (Section 6.5). The results are plotted in Figure 7.1. We computed a price
for a 1-year lookback using the price-oriented rule and bound (see Subsection 7.3.1),
with K = 1, R = 0.15, Q = 0.1, and M = 1.5. These R, Q, and M values hold for
all years but two in our test. In addition, for each year we computed the payoff of the
lookback option, and ran our algorithm with the price-oriented rule and computed its
profit. In our calculations we used a single value of η, which is the value that minimized
our price bound. The BSM pricing [30] was computed for comparison, using the average
volatility for the whole data, and assuming zero risk-free interest. Note that the stock
prices for each year were normalized so that S0 = 1 at the beginning of the year.

      We compare the net payoff to the lookback option price. Recall that the net payoff
is the difference between the payoff to the option holder (always non-negative) and the
profit (or loss) the algorithm made in trading. We observe that our lookback option
price dominates the net payoff for every year, with our option price at about 0.4 and
the maximal net payoff at about 0.3. Note that the option payoff itself occasionally
7.6. APPENDIX: ADDITIONAL CLAIMS                                                                                 119

             K                       1.0       1.1          1.2       1.3    1.4     1.5        1.6    1.7     1.8
 Opt. One-Way Trading Rule       0.602      0.541       0.481      0.421    0.361   0.301    0.241    0.180   0.120
     Price-Oriented Rule         0.687      0.586       0.493      0.408    0.330   0.259    0.195    0.137   0.086
  Price-Oriented Rule, η = 1     0.693      0.598       0.511      0.431    0.357   0.288    0.223    0.163   0.105

Table 7.1: A comparison of different price bounds for different values of the strike
price. The first row features the competitive ratio-based bound using the optimal one-
way trading rule of El-Yaniv et al. and the optimal η (always η = 1). The other rows
feature the price-oriented bound, either with the optimal η or with η = 1. The settings
used were R = 0.2, Q = 0.2, and M = 2, as well as T = 252 trading days and a lower
bound of 0.5 on the stock price for the optimal one-way trading bound.


exceeds this maximal net payoff, highlighting the influence of the trading algorithm.
   We conclude with a comparison of our two different bound derivations for different
values of the strike price K (see Table 7.1). One derivation is the price-oriented bound
of Theorem 7.9, and the other is the competitive ratio-based bound of Theorem 7.10.
For the latter bound we use the optimal one-way trading rule of [36]. We set R = 0.2,
Q = 0.2, and M = 2. In addition, we set T = 252 trading days and a lower bound of
0.5 on the stock price for the optimal one-way trading bound. For the price-oriented
rule, we give both the bound with optimal η and the bound with η = 1. For the optimal
one-way trading rule, η = 1 was always the best choice for this setting.
   It can be seen that for the price-oriented rule, working with the optimal η is better
than merely one-way trading (η = 1). For lower values of K, the optimal one-way
trading rule does better, whereas for higher values of K, the price-oriented rule does
better.



7.6       Appendix: Additional Claims
                                                        p             √
Lemma 7.16. It holds that MT ≤ (1 +                      Q/T )T ≤ exp( QT ).


Proof. Clearly, for MT to reach its highest possible value given R and Q we must have
rt ≥ 0 for every 1 ≤ t ≤ T , in which case MT = ST . By the inequality of the geometric,
arithmetic, and quadratic means, we have:

                               T
                                                 ! T1             T                         T
                  1            Y                             1X                 1X
                 ST
                  T
                      =              (1 + rt )          ≤       (1 + rt ) = 1 +    rt
                                                             T                  T
                               t=1                                t=1                       t=1
                                           T
                                                     ! 12
                                      1X 2                            p
                      ≤ 1+              rt                  ≤1+        Q/T ,
                                      T
                                           t=1
120                   CHAPTER 7. A CLOSER LOOK AT LOOKBACK OPTIONS

hence
                                p                       p                  p
                  ST ≤ (1 +         Q/T )T ≤ exp(T          Q/T ) = exp(       QT ) ,

where we used the fact that 1 + x ≤ exp(x).
                                                Pn
Lemma 7.17. If z0 , . . . , zn > 0, then          i=1 zi ln(zi /zi−1 ) ≥ zn − z0 .


Proof. For every 1 ≤ i ≤ n we have that

                                 zi             zi /zi−1 − 1
                        zi ln          ≥ zi ·                = zi − zi−1 ,
                                zi−1               zi /zi−1

                                                     x
where the inequality uses the fact that ln(1 + x) ≥ x+1 for x ∈ (−1, ∞). The result
follows by simple summation.
Chapter 8


Pricing Based on Additive Regret

8.1        Relating Multiplicative Regret to Standard Regret

In Chapters 6 and 7 we priced various derivatives based on the performance guaran-
tees of trading algorithms. These results used the intimate connection between the
price of the option Ψ(X1 , . . . , XN , T ) and the multiplicative regret guarantees of al-
gorithms trading in the derivatives X1 , . . . , XN . In our analysis we depended on the
multiplicative regret guarantees of the Generic algorithm as a basic regret minimization
component.
    The Generic algorithm is an adaptation of the Polynomial Weights algorithm [25],
which was originally developed for the standard best expert setting. However, the
(additive) regret bounds proved in [25] do not readily translate into multiplicative
regret bounds, and required an elaborate new analysis by the authors of Generic in
[35].

  The Polynomial Weights Algorithm
  Parameters: A learning rate η > 0 and initial weights wi,1 > 0, 1 ≤ i ≤ N .
  For each round t = 1, . . . , T
                                                                   PN
        1. Define probabilities pi,t = wi,t /Wt , where Wt =          i=1 wi,t .


        2. For each expert i = 1, . . . , N , let wi,t+1 = wi,t (1 − ηli,t ).

    The case of the Polynomial Weights and Generic algorithms highlights two impor-
tant points. First, algorithms for the best expert setting may be naturally interpreted
as trading algorithms, by taking the probabilities of picking experts to be fractions of

                                                   121
122                           CHAPTER 8. PRICING BASED ON ADDITIVE REGRET

wealth to invest in assets. Second, results in the best expert setting do not carry over
directly to the trading setting. These facts clearly motivate finding a scheme for trans-
lating additive regret bounds into multiplicative regret bounds, and thereby harnessing
the power of results in the best expert setting.
      For this purpose, we consider a natural representation of the trading scenario in
terms of a best expert scenario. Let X1 , . . . , XN be derivatives (experts), where Xi,t > 0
for every 1 ≤ i ≤ N and 1 ≤ t ≤ T , and let ri,t be their single-period returns. For
every 1 ≤ i ≤ N , the initial value Xi,0 is allowed to be an arbitrary positive number,
                                                       −1
and the algorithm will trade in the fractional assets Xi,0 Xi , whose initial value is 1.
We will assume w.l.o.g. that the algorithm starts with one unit of cash, that is, V0 = 1.
We next define the single-period losses of the experts as li,t = − ln(1 + ri,t ). This way,
the cumulative losses of the experts translate directly to minus the logarithms of their
fractional asset values, that is,

                          t
                          X                      t
                                                 X
                 Li,t =          li,τ = −               ln(Xi,τ /Xi,τ −1 ) = − ln(Xi,t /Xi,0 ) .
                          τ =1                   τ =1


However, the cumulative loss of an algorithm A for the best expert setting does not
simply translate to minus the logarithm of its final wealth as a trading algorithm. We
have that
                                         t
                                         X                       t X
                                                                 X N
                           LA,t =               lA,τ = −                    pi,τ ln(1 + ri,τ ) ,
                                         τ =1                    τ =1 i=1

whereas

                                    t
                                    X                                       t
                                                                            X           N
                                                                                        X
                  − ln Vt = −                  ln(Vτ /Vτ −1 ) = −                  ln         pi,τ (1 + ri,τ )
                                    τ =1                                    τ =1        i=1
                                      t                      N
                                                                               !
                                    X                        X
                            =−                 ln 1 +              pi,τ ri,τ       .
                                        τ =1                 i=1


In order to relate these two different quantities, we will need the next lemma.

                     PN
Lemma 8.1. Let             i=1 pi       = 1, where 0 ≤ pi ≤ 1 for every 1 ≤ i ≤ N , and let
zi ∈ (−1, ∞) for every 1 ≤ i ≤ N . Then

                     N
                                    !                                                         N
                     X                                           1 + maxi {zi }                 X
                                                         2
            ln 1 +         pi z i       − (1/8) ln                                          ≤         pi ln(1 + zi ) .
                                                                 1 + mini {zi }
                     i=1                                                                        i=1


Proof. Note first that it is sufficient to prove the statement for the case where the values
8.1. RELATING MULTIPLICATIVE REGRET TO STANDARD REGRET                                                                              123

zi are distinct, and then invoke the continuity of the above expressions in z1 , . . . , zN .
Consider a random variable Y , which has the value ln(1 + zi ) with probability pi , for
every i. By Hoeffding’s lemma (Lemma A.1), we have that


              ln(E[eY ]) ≤ E[Y ] + (1/8)(max{ln(1 + zi )} − min{ln(1 + zi )})2
                                           i                      i
                                                               
                                               1 + max i {z i }
                         = E[Y ] + (1/8) ln2                      .
                                               1 + mini {zi }

Since

                                                N
                                                                            !                       N
                                                                                                                    !
                                                X                                                   X
                              Y                                 ln(1+zi )
                     ln(E[e ]) = ln                      pi e                   = ln 1 +                   pi z i
                                                   i=1                                               i=1

              PN
and E[Y ] =     i=1 pi ln(1 + zi ), we have that


                     N
                                     !       N                                                                             
                     X                       X                                                      1 + maxi {zi }
                                                                                            2
           ln 1 +           pi z i       ≤         pi ln(1 + zi ) + (1/8) ln                                                    ,
                                                                                                    1 + mini {zi }
                      i=1                    i=1


and, rearranging, we get the desired result.




   Before proceeding, we recall the definition of the relative quadratic variation qT ,
given in Chapter 2, and note that for the current scenario we have that

                     T
                     X                                                      T
                                                                            X                                          
                                                                                            1 + maxi {ri,t }
              qT =         (max{li,t } − min{li,t })2 =                           ln2                                       .
                               i                    i                                       1 + mini {ri,t }
                     t=1                                                    t=1


We can now prove the following relation.



Theorem 8.2. It holds that 0 ≤ LA,T + ln VT ≤ qT /8, and as a result,

                                                               VT
                              0 ≤ RA,T + ln                     −1         ≤ qT /8 .
                                                         maxi {Xi,0 Xi,T }


Proof. We have that

                                     T
                                     X                                T
                                                                      X                  N
                                                                                         X
                      ln VT =                ln(Vt /Vt−1 ) =                    ln(1 +              pi,t ri,t ) .
                                     t=1                              t=1                i=1
124                             CHAPTER 8. PRICING BASED ON ADDITIVE REGRET

By the concavity of ln(1 + z),

      T
      X              N
                     X                     X N
                                           T X                                 T X
                                                                               X N
            ln(1 +         pi,t ri,t ) ≥             pi,t ln(1 + ri,t ) = −               pi,t li,t = −LA,T ,
      t=1            i=1                   t=1 i=1                             t=1 i=1


and thus, ln VT ≥ −LA,T , or 0 ≤ LA,T + ln VT , as required. For the other side, we have
by Lemma 8.1 that

                            T X
                            X N
             −LA,T =                      pi,t ln(1 + ri,t )
                            t=1 i=1
                            T
                                  "            N                                                     #
                            X                  X                                   1 + maxi {ri,t }
                       ≥              ln(1 +         pi,t ri,t ) − (1/8) ln2
                                                                                   1 + mini {ri,t }
                            t=1                i=1

                       = ln VT − qT /8 ,

                                            −1
as needed. Since mini {Li,T } = − ln maxi {Xi,0 Xi,T }, we have that

                                               −1
               0 ≤ LA,T − min{Li,T } − ln max{Xi,0 Xi,T } + ln VT ≤ qT /8 ,
                                      i                     i


or equivalently,
                                                            VT
                               0 ≤ RA,T + ln                 −1         ≤ qT /8 ,
                                                      maxi {Xi,0 Xi,T }

completing the proof.



8.2     Upper Bounds on Option Prices

The result of Theorem 8.2 may be used in conjunction with Lemma 6.2 to upper bound
Ψ(X1 , . . . , XN , T ). The only missing element now is an algorithm for the best expert
setting, which provides performance guarantees. We have the following:


Theorem 8.3. Let A be an algorithm for the best expert setting, which guarantees
LA,T − Li,T + ln Xi,0 ≤ γ for some γ, for every expert i and any loss sequence. Then


                                            Ψ(X1 , . . . , XN , T ) ≤ eγ .


Proof. Since Li,T = − ln(Xi,T /Xi,0 ), we have by Theorem 8.2 that


                              0 ≤ LA,T − Li,T − ln(Xi,T /Xi,0 ) + ln VT ,
8.2. UPPER BOUNDS ON OPTION PRICES                                                               125

and therefore
                     −γ ≤ −(LA,T − Li,T + ln Xi,0 ) ≤ ln VT − ln Xi,T .

Thus, we have that VT /Xi,T ≥ e−γ for every i, and Lemma 6.2 yields the result.


Corollary 8.4. If U is an upper bound on RA,T , then


                           Ψ(X1 , . . . , XN , T ) ≤ eU · max{Xi,0 } .
                                                          i


     We next apply the above theorem to specific algorithms.


8.2.1    Application to the Polynomial Weights Algorithm

We begin by considering the Polynomial Weights algorithm, which was the basis for
Generic. Denoting A for the Polynomial Weights algorithm run with parameters η and
w1,1 , . . . , wN,1 , we have the following guarantees:

Theorem 8.5. ([25]) Assume that li,t ≤ B for every t = 1, . . . , T and i = 1, . . . , N for
some B > 0. Then for any sequence of losses and any expert i, 0 < η ≤ 1/(2B), and
                                                    P
T ≥ 1, it holds that LA,T ≤ Li,T − (1/η) ln pi,1 + η Tt=1 li,t
                                                           2 .



     Note that the requirement li,t ≤ B translates into ri,t ≥ e−B − 1 for every i and
t. This is a more minimal one-sided requirement compared with the one in our model,
which bounds |ri,t |.
                                                                   PT         2
     We will now assume a known upper bound Qi,T on                      t=1 li,t ,   namely, Qi,T ≥
PT      2
  t=1 ln (1 + ri,t ) for every i. In the context of Theorem 8.3, the guarantees of Theo-

rem 8.5 then imply a bound γ defined by γ = maxi {γi }, where


                            γi = −(1/η) ln pi,1 + ηQi,T + ln Xi,0 .


We now proceed to choose parameters that minimize γ and thereby the upper bound on
Ψ(X1 , . . . , XN , T ). Since p1,1 + . . . + pN,1 = 1, optimizing for the values pi,1 necessarily
means equalizing the quantities γi . It is easy to see that in order to achieve this, one
should choose, for every i, the values

                                              η η Qi,T
                                                    2
                                             Xi,0 e
                                  pi,1 = PN      η η 2 Qk,T   ,
                                            k=1 Xk,0 e
126                         CHAPTER 8. PRICING BASED ON ADDITIVE REGRET

and that for this choice

                                                       N
                                                                           !1/η
                                                       X      η η 2 Qk,T
                       γ = γ1 = . . . = γN = ln              Xk,0 e               .
                                                       k=1


We may further optimize for η, and in conjunction with Theorem 8.3 obtain the fol-
lowing:


Theorem 8.6. Assuming ri,t ≥ e−B − 1 for every i and t, for some B > 0, it holds
that                                                                             !1/η
                                                             N
                                                             X      η η 2 Qk,T
                  Ψ(X1 , . . . , XN , T ) ≤      min               Xk,0 e               .
                                              0<η≤1/(2B)
                                                             k=1



8.2.2     Application to the Hedge Algorithm

In this subsection we prove a new performance guarantee for Hedge, which is based on
the relative quadratic variation, and then apply it to upper bound option prices.1


Theorem 8.7. Let A be the Hedge algorithm run with parameters η > 0 and
                              P
p1,0 , . . . , pN,0 > 0, where Ni=1 pi,0 = 1. Then for every expert i,


                                                  1    1  η
                               LA,T − Li,T ≤        ln   + · qT .
                                                  η pi,0  8
                                                                    p
If q ′ is a known upper bound on qT , then setting η =               (8/q ′ ) ln N and pi,0 = 1/N for
every i implies
                                                 p
                                      RA,T ≤      (q ′ /2) ln N .

Proof. As discussed in Chapter 3, Hedge may be defined as the gradient of the concave
                             P
potential Φη (L) = −(1/η) ln( Nj=1 pj,0 e
                                          −ηLj ). Applying Theorem 3.3 to Φ and setting
                                                                           η

L0 = 0 yields
                                                                T
                                                    1X ⊤ 2
                     RA,T = Φη (LT ) − min{Lj,T } −   lt ∇ Φ(zt )lt ,
                                        j           2
                                                               t=1

where zt ∈ [Lt−1 , Lt ], t = 1, . . . , T , or equivalently,

                                                       T
                                               1X ⊤ 2
                             LA,T = Φη (LT ) −   lt ∇ Φ(zt )lt .                                (8.1)
                                               2
                                                       t=1

   1
    We comment that a bound in the same spirit on the regret of Hedge was given in [25], but it has
a worse constant than the bound presented here for the case we consider.
8.2. UPPER BOUNDS ON OPTION PRICES                                                            127

By definition of Φη it holds for every i that
                                                          
                                          N
                                    1 X                       1
                Φη (LT ) − Li,T = − ln       pj,0 e−ηLj,T  + ln e−ηLi,T
                                    η                          η
                                         j=1
                                                            !
                                  1      exp(−ηLi,T )           1 pi,T +1
                                = ln PN                       = ln
                                  η       j=1 pj,0 e
                                                     −ηLj,T     η  pi,0
                                     1    1
                                 ≤     ln   .
                                     η pi,0

Together with Equation 8.1 we have that for every i,

                                                           T
                                    1   1   1X ⊤ 2
                       LA,T − Li,T ≤ ln   −   lt ∇ Φ(zt )lt .                                (8.2)
                                    η pi,0 2
                                                          t=1


Now we bound the sum on the right hand side.                       By Lemma 3.14, for every t,
−l⊤  2
  t ∇ Φ(zt )lt = ηV ar(Yt ), where Yt is some discrete random variable that may at-

tain only the values l1,t , . . . , lN,t . Thus, by Popoviciu’s inequality (Corollary A.3),

                                           η
                       −l⊤  2
                         t ∇ Φ(zt )lt ≤      · (max{lj,t } − min{lj,t })2
                                           4     j            j


for every t, and Equation 8.2 yields


                                          1    1   η
                             LA,T − Li,T ≤  ln   + · qT ,
                                          η pi,0   8
                                                 p
as needed. Setting pi,0 = 1/N for every i and η = (8/q ′ ) ln N then yields

                                       1       η       p
                      LA,T − Li,T ≤      ln N + · q ′ = (q ′ /2) ln N ,
                                       η       8

completing the proof.



   The above guarantees can now be used to upper bound Ψ(X1 , . . . , XN , T ) in a
similar way to the derivation in the case of Polynomial Weights.


Theorem 8.8. If q ′ is a known upper bound on qT , then
                                                                               !1/η 
                                                                 N
                                                                   X                 
                                                                          η
               Ψ(X1 , . . . , XN , T ) ≤ min       exp ηq ′ /8 ·         Xk,0            .
                                       η>0                                         
                                                                   k=1
128                        CHAPTER 8. PRICING BASED ON ADDITIVE REGRET

Proof. Theorem 8.7 yields for every i that LA,T − Li,T + ln Xi,0 ≤ γi , where

                                      1    1  η
                               γi =     ln   + · q ′ + ln Xi,0 .
                                      η pi,0  8

Choosing the values
                                                  η
                                                 Xi,0
                                       pi,0 = PN     η
                                                k=1 Xk,0

obtains                                                            !1/η 
                                                           N
                                                           X
                    γ1 = . . . = γN = ln exp(ηq ′ /8) ·         Xη
                                                                  k,0
                                                                          ,
                                                           k=1

and the result follows by Theorem 8.3.



8.3       Lower Bounds on Option Prices

Establishing lower bounds on option prices is conceptually similar to establishing upper
bounds, given the arbitrage-free assumption. If a trading algorithm is guaranteed to
satisfy VT ≤ β maxi {Xi,T } for some β > 0, then 1/β units of cash invested with it
will always be dominated by the payoff of Ψ(X1 , . . . , XN , T ), implying a lower bound
of 1/β on the price of the option. If this bound did not hold, then the strategy of
buying the option and investing −1/β units of cash with the algorithm (shorting it)
could guarantee a riskless profit. We thus have

Lemma 8.9. If there exists a trading algorithm that guarantees VT ≤ β maxi {Xi,T },
then Ψ(X1 , . . . , XN , T ) ≥ 1/β.

      In other words, to show lower bounds we are required to devise a regret guaranteeing
algorithm, rather than a regret minimizing algorithm, as was the case with upper
bounds. We stress that such guarantees (and lower bounds) will hold for any price
sequence that has certain properties. This is in contrast to BSM exact pricing, where
such guarantees hold only for some of those sequences.
      In the context of additive regret, this problem may be solved using the results of
Chapter 3. First, a lower bound on the anytime regret of a specific algorithm is shown.
Then, we note that such an algorithm may be modified so as to “lock in” that regret
from the moment the regret bound is exceeded until time T . (This method of locking
in regret is used in [35].) This idea is formalized below.
8.3. LOWER BOUNDS ON OPTION PRICES                                                    129

Lemma 8.10. Let λ be a lower bound on the anytime regret of some algorithm A for
the best expert setting. Then there exists an algorithm for which


                      VT ≤ exp(qT /8 − λ) · (min{Xi,0 })−1 · max{Xi,T } .
                                                  i                   i


In addition, if all price paths are guaranteed to satisfy qT ≤ q ′ , then


                       Ψ(X1 , . . . , XN , T ) ≥ exp(λ − q ′ /8) · min{Xi,0 } .
                                                                     i


Proof. We will trade with a modified version of A, denoted A′ , defined as follows. Up
until the first time t for which the regret of A is greater or equal to λ, A′ is identical
to A. Then, A′ places all its weight on (transfers all wealth to) the best expert at time
t, m(t), from time t + 1 to T . Thus,


           RA′ ,T = LA′ ,T − Lm(T ),T ≥ LA′ ,T − Lm(t),T = LA′ ,t − Lm(t),t ≥ λ .


By Theorem 8.2, we have for A′ that

                                                  VT
                              RA′ ,T + ln          −1         ≤ qT /8
                                            maxi {Xi,0 Xi,T }

and therefore,

                                                     −1
                 VT    ≤ exp(qT /8 − RA′ ,T ) · max{Xi,0 Xi,T }
                                                      i

                       ≤ exp(qT /8 − RA′ ,T ) · (min{Xi,0 })−1 · max{Xi,T }
                                                          i               i
                                                              −1
                       ≤ exp(qT /8 − λ) · (min{Xi,0 })             · max{Xi,T } .
                                                  i                   i


The second claim of the lemma now follows immediately from Lemma 8.9.



   Lower bounds on the anytime regret are provided in Chapter 3 for Hedge, assuming
there are known lower and upper bound guarantees for qT . Those results may now be
used to prove the following theorem:


Theorem 8.11. If qT ∈ [q, γq] holds for every price path for some γ ≥ 1, then

                                               √
                 Ψ(X1 , . . . , XN , T ) ≥ exp( q/(4N ) − γq/8) · min{Xi,0 } .
                                                                          i
130                        CHAPTER 8. PRICING BASED ON ADDITIVE REGRET

Furthermore, for N = 2,

                                            √
                 Ψ(X1 , X2 , T ) ≥ exp(0.195 q − γq/8) · min{X1,0 , X2,0 } .


Proof. By Theorem 3.19, there are specific parameter settings for Hedge for which its
                                       √
anytime regret is lower bounded by λ = q/(4N ). Therefore, by Lemma 8.10,


                     Ψ(X1 , . . . , XN , T ) ≥ exp(λ − γq/8) · min{Xi,0 } .
                                                                                  i

                                                                 √
For N = 2, Theorem 3.16 provides the stronger guarantee λ = 0.195 q, and thus

                                               √
                    Ψ(X1 , X2 , T ) ≥ exp(0.195 q − γq/8) · min{Xi,0 } ,
                                                                                      i


as desired.

      Note that for the simple case X1,0 = . . . = XN,0 = 1, it is easy to obtain a trivial
lower bound of Ψ(X1 , . . . , XN , T ) ≥ 1 by considering an algorithm that initially places
some fractions of its wealth on each asset and does not trade. This algorithm clearly
guarantees VT ≤ maxi {Xi,T }, yielding the trivial price bound by Lemma 8.9. Thus,
for this case, the bounds of the above theorem are non-trivial only if the expressions
inside the exponents are positive, which requires that q < 4/(γN )2 for a general N and
q < 2.43/γ 2 for N = 2.


8.3.1      A Lower Bound on the Price of “at the Money” Call Options

The price of a call option satisfies C(K, T ) = Ψ(X1 , X2 , T ) − K, where X1 is the stock
and X2 is K in cash. For these assets,

                           T
                           X                                           T
                                                                         X
                                      2       1 + maxi {ri,t }
                    qT =         ln                                  =         ln2 (1 + r1,t ) .
                                              1 + mini {ri,t }
                           t=1                                           t=1


We will apply Theorem 8.11 to the pricing of a call option that is “at the money”,
namely, with K = S0 (recall that S0 = 1).2 For that case, the theorem implies that

                                                √
                            C(1, T ) ≥ exp(0.195 q − γq/8) − 1 .
  2
    We comment that the bounds implied by Theorem 8.11 for K 6= 1 are less interesting, since they
do not improve on bounds that are derived from the bound on C(1, T ) through the trivial relations
C(K, T ) ≥ C(1, T ) + 1 − K for K > 1, and C(K, T ) ≥ C(1, T ) for K < 1.
8.3. LOWER BOUNDS ON OPTION PRICES                                                  131

To get a clearer picture, consider the specific scenario where γ = 1 (namely, qT = q),
                                        p
and assume q < 0.5, implying that q < q/2. Theorem 8.11 then yields the following:

                                                             √            √
Corollary 8.12. If γ = 1 and q < 0.5, then C(1, T ) ≥ exp(0.1 q) − 1 ≥ 0.1 q.

    Note that by combining Theorem 8.7 and Corollary 8.4 we may also obtain an upper
                         p
bound of C(1, T ) ≤ exp( (q/2) ln 2) − 1, which for asymptotically small values of q
             p                √
behaves like (q/2) ln 2 ∼ 0.59 q. In comparison, the BSM pricing has an asymptotic
                         √ √           √
value that corresponds to q/ 2π ∼ 0.4 q for small values of q (see Appendix B). All
three expressions therefore have the same type of asymptotic behavior. The difference in
the constants is expected, since our model is adversarial while the BSM model assumes
a stochastic setting.
Chapter 9


Conclusion

The results presented in this thesis include improved regret minimization algorithms
for specific scenarios as well as regret lower bounds that apply to widely used existing
algorithms. In addition, our results comprise robust arbitrage-free price bounds for
various derivatives and show how to directly translate regret bounds into price bounds.
   These results demonstrate a solid link between regret minimization and arbitrage-
free pricing. Namely, we show that regret bounds imply price bounds more directly
and for more general derivatives and scenarios than considered before. Conversely, the
consideration of pricing problems has motivated some of the “pure” regret minimization
results presented, highlighting a fruitful interaction between these two different types
of problems.



9.1    Summary of Results and Future Work

The main results presented in this work are detailed below, by subject. For each subject
we also mention interesting directions for further research.


Lower bounds on individual sequence regret.             We characterize a class of algo-
rithms that guarantee non-negative regret for any sequence of losses in the online linear
optimization setting. This class is shown to include all linear Regularized Follow the
Leader regret minimization algorithms.
   Furthermore, we present a lower bound on the anytime regret that depends on the
quadratic variation of the loss sequence, QT , and the learning rate. We give a trade-
                                                                                √
off result whereby any learning rate that guarantees a regret upper bound of O( QT )

                                          132
9.1. SUMMARY OF RESULTS AND FUTURE WORK                                               133

                         √
necessarily implies an Ω( QT ) anytime regret on any sequence with quadratic variation
QT . This result is proved for two sub-classes of algorithms that include Hedge and linear
cost Online Gradient Descent.
   It is not clear how tight our lower bounds on the anytime regret are. In particular,
the dependence of our bound for Hedge on the number of experts could possibly be
improved. This would immediately improve the lower bounds on option prices that we
derive using this regret bound.
   Another open question concerns the assumption we make regarding a fixed learning
rate, which somewhat limits the scope of our results. It would be interesting to see how
our methods and lower bounds may be altered to handle some flexibility in the choice
of the learning rate.


Regret minimization for branching experts.           We present algorithms and analysis
for a novel regret minimization setting of branching experts, in which the set of experts
may grow over time according to a tree-like structure, determined by an adversary. Our
results cover both the full information and the bandit scenarios.
   We show that these results may be applied to two scenarios of the standard best
expert setting with full information, in which the expert set is of limited realized com-
plexity. In one scenario the number of leaders, namely, different experts that were best
at some point in time, is small. In the other, all experts remain grouped in just a few
clusters in terms of their realized cumulative losses. In both cases we give optimal re-
gret bounds that depend only on the effective number of experts, that is, the number of
leaders or clusters. These bounds improve on the bounds of general-purpose algorithms
such as Hedge for scenarios where the number of clusters or leaders is logarithmic in
the number of experts.
   However, our bound for the bandit setting is not independent of the number of
experts and whether or not this dependence is avoidable remains unclear. In addition,
we do not have algorithms for the few leaders and few clusters scenarios in the bandit
setting. Designing such algorithms appears difficult in this setting, but there are no
definitive results.


Derivative pricing.      We apply a unified regret minimization framework to obtain
variation-based price upper bounds for a variety of options, based on the method of
[35]. These options include the exchange option, the shout option, and several types of
134                                                      CHAPTER 9. CONCLUSION

Asian options. These bounds are derived by considering a security whose payoff is the
maximum of several derivatives.

      In addition, we give robust variation-based upper bounds on the prices of convex
path-independent derivatives. These price upper bounds are derived given a robust
upper bound on the price of European call options.

      For the particular problem of pricing lookback options, we present a new family of
regret minimization algorithms that combines two algorithmic components: a regret
minimization component and a one-way trading component. We translate the perfor-
mance of these algorithms into explicit variation-based upper bounds on the price of
fixed-strike lookback options. These algorithms, which are in general two-way trading,
offer a new two-way trading solution to the problem of searching for the maximum of
an online sequence. Furthermore, our methods may achieve better competitive ratios
than the optimal one-way trading algorithm of [36].

      We develop a general new formula that allows regret bounds to be directly converted
to a financial setting. As a result, existing regret bounds may be applied without any
need for algorithmic modifications or additional analysis. This method is applied to
obtain new variation-based price upper bounds that are applicable in broader settings
than the one considered in [35].

      Finally, we give the first robust lower bound on the price of “at the money” call
options with the same asymptotic behavior as the robust upper bound given in [35].
This bound is obtained by combining our lower bounds on the individual sequence
anytime regret of Hedge with our method for converting additive regret bounds to
the financial setting. This price bound has the same asymptotic behavior as the Black-
Scholes-Merton price, even though our assumptions are minimal and adversarial, rather
than stochastic.

      Our pricing results are obtained in an idealized model of the market. Perhaps the
most important aspect of this idealization is the absence of transaction costs when
buying or selling securities. Transaction costs lower the returns of online trading algo-
rithms, increasing the regret of such algorithms w.r.t. any fixed security, and thereby
increasing upper bounds on option prices. Incorporating transaction costs in our pric-
ing results in a non-trivial way would be an important robust pricing result, and is
likely to have “pure” regret minimization implications as well.

      Another aspect that is absent in our results is the use of loans and short selling
9.1. SUMMARY OF RESULTS AND FUTURE WORK                                                135

by the trading algorithms. Short selling is inherent in the arbitrage-free assumption,
which is part of the model we use. However, our application of online algorithms to
pricing does not utilize short selling. It is possible that algorithms that do employ short
selling may be used to provide improved price bounds.
Appendix A


Additional Claims

Lemma A.1. (Hoeffding’s lemma, [56]) Let s ∈ R, and let X be a random variable
such that a ≤ X ≤ b, for some a, b ∈ R. Then


                        ln(E[esX ]) ≤ sE[X] + s2 (b − a)2 /8 .


Theorem A.2. (The Bhatia-Davis inequality, [10]) If X is a bounded random variable
with values in [m, M ], then V ar(X) ≤ (M − E[X])(E[X] − m), with equality iff P(X ∈
{m, M }) = 1.

Proof. We have that


     (M − E[X])(E[X] − m) = M E[X] − mM − E[X]2 + mE[X]

                             = E[M X + mX − mM ] − E[X 2 ] + E[X 2 ] − E[X]2

                             = E[M X + mX − mM − X 2 ] + V ar(X)

                             = E[(M − X)(X − m)] + V ar(X)

                             ≥ V ar(X) ,


where the inequality is true because (M − X)(X − m) ≥ 0. We get an equality iff
P((M − X)(X − m) = 0) = 1, which happens iff P(X ∈ {m, M }) = 1.

Corollary A.3. (Popoviciu’s inequality, [74]) If X is a bounded random variable with
values in [m, M ], then V ar(X) ≤ (M − m)2 /4, with equality iff P(X = M ) = P(X =
m) = 1/2.

Proof. The expression (M − x)(x − m) reaches a maximal value of (M − m)2 /4 iff

                                         136
                                                                         137

x = (M + m)/2. Therefore, by the Bhatia-Davis inequality,


                V ar(X) ≤ (M − E[X])(E[X] − m) ≤ (M − m)2 /4 .


We get an equality iff P(X ∈ {m, M }) = 1 and also E[X] = (M + m)/2, which is
equivalent to the condition P(X = M ) = P(X = m) = 1/2.
Appendix B



The Black-Scholes Formula


Denote S0 for the initial stock price, T for the expiration time, K for the strike price,
r for the risk-free interest rate, and σ for the volatility. Denote also

                                   ln(S0 /K) + (r + σ 2 /2) · T
                            d1 =              √                 ,
                                             σ T
               √
and d2 = d1 − σ T . Then the Black-Scholes value for C(K, T ) is


                         C(K, T ) = Φ(d1 ) · S0 − Φ(d2 )Ke−rT ,

                    Rx     z2
                          − 2
where Φ(x) = √12π    −∞ e     dz (not to be confused with potential functions Φ). In our
case, r = 0 and S0 = 1, therefore

                                       √
           C(K, T ) = Φ(d1 ) − Φ(d1 − σ T )K
                                                                   
                         − ln(K) + σ 2 T /2        − ln(K) − σ 2 T /2
                    =Φ           √            −Φ          √             K.
                                σ T                      σ T

For K = 1, we get the simpler expression

                                          √ !       √ !
                                         σ T       σ T
                         C(1, T ) = Φ         −Φ −      .
                                          2         2


                                             138
                                                                                  139
         √
For x = σ 2 T → 0, we may use the first order approximation Φ(x) ≈ 12 + Φ′ (x)x. Thus,

                                          1            1
              C(1, T ) = Φ(x) − Φ(−x) ≈     + Φ′ (x)x − − Φ′ (−x)(−x)
                                          2            2
                      = (Φ′ (x) + Φ′ (−x))x = 2Φ′ (x)x
                                                     
                          2 − x2         2         x2
                      = √ e 2 x≈ √            1−        x
                          2π             2π        2
                                  √
                         2x      σ T
                      ≈√ = √           .
                          2π       2π
140   APPENDIX B. THE BLACK-SCHOLES FORMULA
Bibliography

 [1] J. Abernethy, P. L. Bartlett, and E. Hazan. Blackwell approachability and no-
     regret learning are equivalent. Journal of Machine Learning Research - Proceedings
     Track, 19:27–46, 2011.

 [2] J. Abernethy, R. M. Frongillo, and A. Wibisono. Minimax option pricing meets
     black-scholes in the limit. In Proceedings of the 44th Symposium on Theory of
     Computing, pages 1029–1040, 2012.

 [3] A. Agarwal, E. Hazan, S. Kale, and R. E. Schapire. Algorithms for portfolio
     management based on the newton method. In Proceedings of the 23rd International
     Conference on Machine Learning, pages 9–16, 2006.

 [4] J.-Y. Audibert and S. Bubeck. Minimax policies for adversarial and stochastic
     bandits. In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pages
     217–226.

 [5] J.-Y. Audibert and S. Bubeck. Regret bounds and minimax policies under partial
     monitoring. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11:2785–2836, 2010.

 [6] J.-Y. Audibert, S. Bubeck, and G. Lugosi. Minimax policies for combinatorial
     prediction games. Journal of Machine Learning Research - Proceedings Track, 19:
     107–132, 2011.

 [7] P. Auer, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and P. Fischer. Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed
     bandit problem. Machine Learning, 47(2-3):235–256, 2002.

 [8] P. Auer, N. Cesa-Bianchi, Y. Freund, and R. E. Schapire. The nonstochastic
     multiarmed bandit problem. SIAM Journal on Computing, 32(1):48–77, 2002.

 [9] P. Auer, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and C. Gentile. Adaptive and self-confident on-line
     learning algorithms. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 64(1):48–75, 2002.

[10] R. Bhatia and C. Davis. A better bound on the variance. The American Mathe-
     matical Monthly, 107(4):353–357, 2000.

[11] F. Black and M. Scholes. The pricing of options and corporate liabilities. Journal
     of Political Economy, 81(3):637–654, 1973.

[12] D. Blackwell. An analog of the minimax theorem for vector payoffs. Pacific Journal
     of Mathematics, 6(1):1–8, 1956.

[13] A. Blum and C. Burch. On-line learning and the metrical task system problem.
     Machine Learning, 39(1):35–58, 2000.

                                         141
142                                                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY

[14] A. Blum and A. Kalai. Universal portfolios with and without transaction costs.
     Machine Learning, 35(3):193–205, 1999.

[15] A. Blum and Y. Mansour. From external to internal regret. Journal of Machine
     Learning Research, 8:1307–1324, 2007.

[16] A. Borodin and R. El-Yaniv. Online Computation and Competitive Analysis, vol-
     ume 53. Cambridge University Press, 1998.

[17] A. Borodin, R. El-Yaniv, and V. Gogan. Can we learn to beat the best stock.
     Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 21:579–594, 2004.

[18] O. Bousquet and M. Warmuth. Tracking a small set of experts by mixing past
     posteriors. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3:363–396, 2002.

[19] S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe. Convex Optimization. Cambridge University Press,
     2004.

[20] D. T. Breeden and R. H. Litzenberger. Prices of state-contingent claims implicit
     in option prices. Journal of Business, 51(4):621–651, 1978.

[21] S. Bubeck and N. Cesa-Bianchi. Regret analysis of stochastic and nonstochastic
     multi-armed bandit problems. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 5
     (1):1–122, 2012.

[22] N. Buchbinder, S. Chen, J. Naor, and O. Shamir. Unified algorithms for online
     learning and competitive analysis. Journal of Machine Learning Research - Pro-
     ceedings Track, 23:5.1–5.18, 2012.

[23] N. Cesa-Bianchi and G. Lugosi. Prediction, Learning, and Games. Cambridge
     University Press, 2006.

[24] N. Cesa-Bianchi, Y. Freund, D. Haussler, D. P. Helmbold, R. E. Schapire, and
     M. K. Warmuth. How to use expert advice. Journal of the ACM, 44(3):427–485,
     1997.

[25] N. Cesa-Bianchi, Y. Mansour, and G. Stoltz. Improved second-order bounds for
     prediction with expert advice. Machine Learning, 66(2-3):321–352, 2007.

[26] K. Chaudhuri, Y. Freund, and D. Hsu. A parameter-free hedging algorithm. In
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 22, pages 297–305, 2009.

[27] A. V. Chernov and V. Vovk. Prediction with advice of unknown number of experts.
     In Proceedings of the 26th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,
     pages 117–125, 2010.

[28] C.-K. Chiang, T. Yang, C.-J. Lee, M. Mahdavi, C.-J. Lu, R. Jin, and S. Zhu. Online
     optimization with gradual variations. Journal of Machine Learning Research -
     Proceedings Track, 23:6.1–6.20, 2012.

[29] R. Cont and P. Tankov. Financial Modelling with Jump Processes, volume 133.
     Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2004.

[30] A. Conze and Viswanathan. Path dependent options: the case of lookback options.
     Journal of Finance, 46(5):1893–1907, 1991.
BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                           143

[31] T. M. Cover. Universal portfolios. Mathematical Finance, 1(1):1–29, 1991.

[32] T. M. Cover and E. Ordentlich. Universal portfolios with side information. IEEE
     Transactions on Information Theory, 42(2):348–363, 1996.

[33] A. P. Dawid, S. de Rooij, P. Grunwald, W. M. Koolen, G. Shafer, A. Shen,
     N. Vereshchagin, and V. Vovk. Probability-free pricing of adjusted american look-
     backs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1108.4113, 2011.

[34] A. P. Dawid, S. de Rooij, G. Shafer, A. Shen, N. Vereshchagin, and V. Vovk. Insur-
     ing against loss of evidence in game-theoretic probability. Statistics and Probability
     Letters, 81(1):157–162, 2011.

[35] P. DeMarzo, I. Kremer, and Y. Mansour. Online trading algorithms and robust
     option pricing. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
     Computing, pages 477–486, 2006.

[36] R. El-Yaniv, A. Fiat, R. M. Karp, and G. Turpin. Optimal search and one-
     way trading online algorithms. Algorithmica, 30(1):101–139, 2001. A preliminary
     version appeared in FOCS, 1992.

[37] E. Even-Dar, M. Kearns, Y. Mansour, and J. Wortman. Regret to the best vs.
     regret to the average. Machine Learning, 72(1-2):21–37, 2008.

[38] Y. Freund and R. E. Schapire. A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learn-
     ing and an application to boosting. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 55
     (1):119–139, 1997.

[39] Y. Freund, R. Schapire, Y. Singer, and M. Warmuth. Using and combining pre-
     dictors that specialize. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual ACM Symposium on the
     Theory of Computing, pages 334–343, 1997.

[40] E. Gofer and Y. Mansour. Regret minimization algorithms for pricing lookback
     options. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pages 234–248, 2011.

[41] E. Gofer and Y. Mansour. Pricing exotic derivatives using regret minimization. In
     Algorithmic Game Theory, pages 266–277, 2011.

[42] E. Gofer and Y. Mansour. Lower bounds on individual sequence regret. In Algo-
     rithmic Learning Theory, pages 275–289, 2012.

[43] E. Gofer, N. Cesa-Bianchi, C. Gentile, and Y. Mansour. Regret minimization for
     branching experts. Journal of Machine Learning Research - Proceedings Track, 30:
     618–638, 2013.

[44] L. Györfi, G. Lugosi, and F. Udina. Nonparametric kernel-based sequential invest-
     ment strategies. Mathematical Finance, 16(2):337–357, 2006.

[45] J. Hannan. Approximation to Bayes risk in repeated play. In M. Dresher,
     A. Tucker, and P. Wolfe, editors, Contributions to the Theory of Games, volume 3,
     pages 97–139. Princeton University Press, 1957.

[46] E. Hazan. Efficient algorithms for online convex optimization and their applica-
     tions. PhD thesis, Princeton University, 2006.
144                                                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY

[47] E. Hazan. The convex optimization approach to regret minimization. In S. Sra,
     S. Nowozin, and S. J. Wright, editors, Optimization for Machine Learning. MIT
     Press, 2011.

[48] E. Hazan and S. Kale. On stochastic and worst-case models for investing. In
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 22, pages 709–717, 2009.

[49] E. Hazan and S. Kale. Extracting certainty from uncertainty: regret bounded by
     variation in costs. Machine Learning, 80(2-3):165–188, 2010.

[50] E. Hazan and S. Kale. Better algorithms for benign bandits. Journal of Machine
     Learning Research, 12:1287–1311, 2011.

[51] E. Hazan, A. Agarwal, and S. Kale. Logarithmic regret algorithms for online
     convex optimization. Machine Learning, 69(2-3):169–192, 2007.

[52] D. P. Helmbold, R. E. Schapire, Y. Singer, and M. K. Warmuth. On-line portfolio
     selection using multiplicative updates. Mathematical Finance, 8(4):325–347, 1998.

[53] M. Herbster and M. Warmuth. Tracking the best expert. Machine Learning, 32
     (2):151–178, 1998.

[54] D. Hobson. The Skorokhod embedding problem and model-independent bounds
     for option prices. In Paris-Princeton Lectures on Mathematical Finance 2010,
     pages 267–318. Springer, 2011.

[55] D. G. Hobson. Robust hedging of the lookback option. Finance and Stochastics,
     2(4):329–347, 1998.

[56] W. Hoeffding. Probability inequalities for sums of bounded random variables.
     Journal of the American statistical association, 58(301):13–30, 1963.

[57] J. C. Hull. Options, Futures, and Other Derivatives. Prentice-Hall, sixth edition,
     2006.

[58] A. Kalai and S. Vempala. Efficient algorithms for universal portfolios. Journal of
     Machine Learning Research, 3:423–440, 2002.

[59] A. Kalai and S. Vempala. Efficient algorithms for online decision problems. Journal
     of Computer and System Sciences, 71(3):291–307, 2005.

[60] R. Kleinberg, A. Niculescu-Mizil, and Y. Sharma. Regret bounds for sleeping
     experts and bandits. Machine Learning, 80(2-3):245–272, 2010.

[61] W. Koolen, D. Adamskiy, and M. Warmuth. Putting Bayes to sleep. In Advances
     in Neural Information Processing Systems 25, pages 135–143, 2012.

[62] W. M. Koolen and S. de Rooij. Switching investments. Theoretical Computer
     Science, 473:61–76, 2013.

[63] W. M. Koolen and V. Vovk. Buy low, sell high. In Algorithmic Learning Theory,
     pages 335–349, 2012.

[64] T. L. Lai and H. Robbins. Asymptotically efficient adaptive allocation rules. Ad-
     vances in applied mathematics, 6(1):4–22, 1985.
BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                       145

[65] N. Littlestone and M. Warmuth. The weighted majority algorithm. Information
     and Computation, 108:212–261, 1994.

[66] J. Lorenz, K. Panagiotou, and A. Steger. Optimal algorithms for k-search with
     application in option pricing. Algorithmica, 55(2):311–328, 2009.

[67] B. Mandelbrot. The variation of certain speculative prices. Journal of Business,
     36(4):394–419, 1963.

[68] R. C. Merton. Theory of rational option pricing. Bell Journal of Economics and
     Management Science, 4(1):141–183, 1973.

[69] R. C. Merton. Option pricing when underlying stock returns are discontinuous.
     Journal of financial economics, 3(1):125–144, 1976.

[70] A. Nemirovski and D. Yudin. Problem Complexity and Method Efficiency in Op-
     timization. Wiley, 1983.

[71] Y. Nesterov. Introductory Lectures on Convex Optimization: A Basic Course.
     Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2004.

[72] N. Nisan, T. Roughgarden, E. Tardos, and V. V. Vazirani. Algorithmic Game
     Theory. Cambridge University Press, 2007.

[73] E. Ordentlich and T. M. Cover. The cost of achieving the best portfolio in hind-
     sight. Mathematics of Operations Research, 23(4):960–982, 1998.

[74] T. Popoviciu. Sur les équations algébriques ayant toutes leurs racines réelles.
     Mathematica (Cluj), 9:129–145, 1935.

[75] A. Rakhlin, O. Shamir, and K. Sridharan. Relax and localize: From value to
     algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1204.0870, 2012.

[76] H. Robbins. Some aspects of the sequential design of experiments. Bulletin of the
     American Mathematical Society, 58(5):527–535, 1952.

[77] R. T. Rockafellar. Convex Analysis. Princeton University Press, 1970.

[78] B. Russell. The Problems of Philosophy. Oxford University Press, 1912.

[79] W. Schoutens. Lévy Processes in Finance: Pricing Financial Derivatives. Wiley,
     2003.

[80] G. Shafer and V. Vovk. Probability and Finance: It’s Only a Game! John Wiley
     & Sons, 2001.

[81] S. Shalev-Shwartz. Online Learning: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications. PhD
     thesis, The Hebrew University, 2007.

[82] S. Shalev-Shwartz and Y. Singer. A primal-dual perspective of online learning
     algorithms. Machine Learning, 69(2-3):115–142, 2007.

[83] C. R. Shalizi, A. Z. Jacobs, and A. Clauset. Adapting to non-stationarity with
     growing expert ensembles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1103.0949, 2011.

[84] Y. Singer. Switching portfolios. In Proceedings of the 14th Conference on Uncer-
     tainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 488–495, 1998.
146                                                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY

[85] D. Sleator and R. E. Tarjan. Amortized efficiency of list update and paging rules.
     Communications of the ACM, 28(2):202–208, 1985.

[86] N. N. Taleb. The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable. Penguin
     Books, 2008.

[87] W. R. Thompson. On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another
     in view of the evidence of two samples. Biometrika, 25(3/4):285–294, 1933.

[88] J. von Szökefalvi Nagy. Über algebraische gleichungen mit lauter reellen wurzeln.
     Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung, 27:37–43, 1918.

[89] V. Vovk. Aggregating strategies. In Proceedings of the 3rd Annual Workshop on
     Computational Learning Theory, pages 371–383, 1990.

[90] V. Vovk. A game of prediction with expert advice. Journal of Computer and
     System Sciences, 56(2):153–173, 1998.

[91] V. Vovk and C. Watkins. Universal portfolio selection. In Proceedings of the 11th
     Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory, pages 12–23, 1998.

[92] M. Zinkevich. Online convex programming and generalized infinitesimal gradient
     ascent. In ICML, pages 928–936, 2003.
‫הפקולטה למדעים מדויקים ע"ש ריימונד ובברלי סאקלר‬
       ‫בית הספר למדעי המחשב ע"ש בלבטניק‬




     ‫אלגוריתמי למידה חישובית‬
        ‫עם יישומים במימון‬




    ‫חיבור לשם קבלת תואר “דוקטור לפילוסופיה”‬
                     ‫מאת‬
                   ‫איל גופר‬




                  ‫בהנחייתו של‬
              ‫פרופסור ישי מנצור‬




       ‫הוגש לסנאט של אוניברסיטת תל‪-‬אביב‬
                   ‫מרץ ‪4102‬‬
                                         ‫תמצית‬

     ‫קבלת החלטות ולמידה מקוונות הן מרכיב מרכזי בבעיות רבות ומגוונות‪ .‬ההחלטות עשויות להיות‬
     ‫כרוכות במסחר במניות‪ ,‬שיבוץ פרסומות‪ ,‬ניתוב‪ ,‬בחירת היוריסטיקות‪ ,‬או ביצוע מהלכים במשחק‪.‬‬
   ‫המצבים הללו שונים אלה מאלה גם ברמת הסיבוך של סביבת ההחלטה או היריב‪ ,‬סוג ההיזון החוזר‬
     ‫וטבען של ההחלטות האפשריות‪ .‬באופן מפתיע‪ ,‬פותחו בעשורים האחרונים במסגרת תורת הלמידה‬
 ‫המקוונת אלגוריתמים המסוגלים להתמודד עם מגוון בעיות עשיר זה‪ .‬אלגוריתמים אלה הם בעלי שתי‬
     ‫תכונות רצויות‪ .‬ראשית‪ ,‬הנחות המוצא שלהם על סביבת הלמידה הן מינימליות‪ ,‬ועל פי רוב הם אף‬
    ‫מתוכננים להתמודד מול יריב‪ ,‬תכונה ההופכת אותם לגמישים ועמידים במיוחד‪ .‬שנית‪ ,‬מידת איכות‬
‫ההחלטות שלהם מתכנסת תמיד לזו של האסטרטגיה הטובה ביותר מתוך קבוצת אסטרטגיות מסוימת‪,‬‬
                              ‫המשמשת קנה מידה להשוואה‪ .‬תכונה אחרונה זו נקראת מזעור חרטה‪.‬‬
   ‫עבודה זו עוסקת הן בתיאוריה הכללית של מזעור חרטה והן בהשלכות שלה בתחום תמחור הנגזרים‬
                                                                                 ‫הפיננסיים‪.‬‬
        ‫תרומה אחת לתיאוריה של מזעור חרטה היא תוצאה המראה שלחלק מאלגוריתמי מזעור החרטה‬
 ‫החשובים ביותר יש בו זמנית גם תכונה הפוכה‪ ,‬לפיה הם בהכרח מבטיחים קיום רמת חרטה אי‪-‬שלילית‬
       ‫ואף חיובית בכל תסריט אפשרי‪ .‬תרומה אחרת כוללת פיתוח אלגוריתמי מזעור חרטה לנסיבות בהן‬
‫קבוצת האסטרטגיות להשוואה היא בעלת רמה גבוהה של יתירות; מקרים אלה מטופלים במסגרת מודל‬
                                                   ‫המאפשר לאסטרטגיות להתפצל באופן דינאמי‪.‬‬
   ‫התרומות לתחום תמחור הנגזרים מתבססות על רדוקציה מבעיית התמחור לבעיה של מציאת חסמים‬
    ‫לחרטה של אלגוריתמי מסחר‪ .‬תרומות אלה כוללות חסמים מבוססי מזעור חרטה למחירים של מגוון‬
  ‫נגזרים פיננסיים‪ ,‬תוך שימוש הן באלגוריתמים קיימים והן באלגוריתמים שפותחו במיוחד‪ .‬יתרה מכך‪,‬‬
 ‫באמצעות פיתוח שיטה ישירה לתרגום חסמים על איכות הביצועים של אלגוריתמי מזעור חרטה כלליים‬
‫לחסמים על ביצועיהם כאלגוריתמי מסחר‪ ,‬מוכחים חסמים עליונים ותחתונים חדשים על מחירי נגזרים‪.‬‬
                                     ‫תקציר‬
                                                                               ‫מבוא‬
      ‫עבודה זו עוסקת בשני נושאים עיקריים‪ :‬נושא אחד הוא התיאוריה הכללית של אלגוריתמי למידה‬
      ‫מקוונים ומזעור חרטה‪ ,‬והנושא השני הוא יישומים של אלגוריתמים אלה בתחום תמחור הנגזרים‬
                  ‫הפיננסיים‪ .‬מבוא זה יסקור בקצרה את האלמנטים הבסיסיים של שני נושאים אלה‪.‬‬

                                                                      ‫למידה מקוונת‬
      ‫למידה מקוונת היא ענף חשוב בתחום הלמידה החישובית המודרנית‪ ,‬ורעיונותיו העיקריים הופיעו‬
   ‫לראשונה בעבודותיהם של האנאן ובלקוול בשנות החמישים‪ .‬בתסריט למידה מקוונת אופייני מתקיים‬
       ‫משחק בכמה סיבובים בין אלגוריתם לומד לבין יריב‪ .‬לכל אחד מהשחקנים יש קבוצת פעולות (או‬
      ‫החלטות) מותרות‪ ,‬ובכל סיבוב שני השחקנים בוחרים את פעולותיהם בו‪-‬זמנית‪ .‬לאחר שהפעולות‬
  ‫נבחרות‪ ,‬הלומד סופג הפסד‪ ,‬שהוא פונקציה קבועה של זוג הפעולות‪ .‬בסיום המשחק‪ ,‬ניתן להשוות את‬
     ‫סכום ההפסדים של הלומד לסכום ההפסדים שהיה סופג אילו בחר פעולה קבועה מסוימת במהלך‬
‫המשחק‪ .‬החרטה של הלומד מוגדרת כהפרש בין סכום הפסדיו לבין סכום ההפסדים של הפעולה הקבועה‬
     ‫הטובה ביותר‪ .‬מטרת הלומד היא להבטיח חרטה מועטה ללא תלות בפעולות שבחר היריב‪ .‬המהות‬
       ‫המדויקת של החסמים שניתן להבטיח ביחס לחרטה תלויים בפרטי המשחק‪ .‬למרות זאת‪ ,‬ביחס‬
‫למחלקות גדולות של משחקים‪ ,‬באפשרותו של הלומד להבטיח שהחרטה הממוצעת לסיבוב משחק תשאף‬
                      ‫לאפס ככל שאורך המשחק שואף לאינסוף‪ ,‬מצב המוגדר כלמידה ללא חרטה‪.‬‬

                                                            ‫מודל המומחה הטוב ביותר‬

‫התכונות של משחק למידה מקוונת תלויים בפרטי קבוצות ההחלטות האפשריות‪ ,‬פונקצית ההפסד‪ ,‬הטבע‬
                   ‫המדויק של המידע המתקבל על‪-‬ידי הלומד בכל סיבוב‪ ,‬והגבלות אפשריות נוספות‪.‬‬

‫מודל המומחה הטוב ביותר הוא אולי מודל המשחק המקוון הנחקר ביותר‪ .‬במודל זה‪ ,‬היריב בוחר וקטור‬
    ‫של מספרים חסומים‪ ,‬והלומד בוחר וקטור הסתברות באורך זהה‪ .‬ההפסד של הלומד מוגדר כמכפלה‬
  ‫הסקלארית של שני הוקטורים‪ .‬ניתן לראות את הוקטור של היריב כמחירים של קבלת העצות של שורת‬
‫מומחים (עליהם יש ליריב שליטה)‪ .‬הבחירה של הלומד ניתנת לפירוש כבחירה אקראית באחד המומחים‪.‬‬
‫המושג 'מומחים' עשוי להתייחס להיוריסטיקות שונות‪ ,‬דרכים אפשריות לנסיעה עבודה‪ ,‬פרסומות שונות‬
                                                         ‫לשיבוץ באתר מרשתת‪ ,‬וכיוצא באלה‪.‬‬

   ‫האלגוריתם הידוע ביותר למודל זה הוא אלגוריתם ‪ Hedge‬או ‪Randomized Weighted Majority‬‬
 ‫)‪ .(Vovk, 1990; Littlestone and Warmuth, 1994; Freund and Schapire, 1997‬אלגוריתם זה‬
‫נותן לכל מומחה משקל היורד מעריכית עם סכום הפסדיו‪ ,‬ולאחר מכן מנרמל את המשקלים לקבלת ערכי‬
   ‫הסתברות‪ .‬ניתן לשלוט על קצב הירידה המעריכית הזו באמצעות פרמטר מספרי‪ ,‬הקרוי קצב הלימוד‪.‬‬
   ‫סכמת משקול זו ניתנת למימוש באמצעות עדכון כפלי המתבצע בכל סיבוב ויורד מעריכית עם ההפסד‬
 ‫הוא אורך המשחק‪,‬‬    ‫‪ ,‬כאשר‬            ‫בסיבוב האחרון‪ .‬אלגוריתם זה משיג חרטה החסומה על‪-‬ידי‬
‫הוא מספר המומחים‪ ,‬וקצב הלימוד נבחר כפונקציה מתאימה של שניהם‪ .‬חסם זה הוא אופטימלי‪ ,‬שכן‬


                                            ‫א‬
 ‫כל לומד מקוון משיג סדר גודל דומה של חרטה בתוחלת כנגד הפסדים‪ ,‬הנבחרים כרצף אקראי לחלוטין‬
              ‫של משתני ברנולי‪ .‬חסמים אלה‪ ,‬התלויים באורך המשחק‪ ,‬נקראים חסמים מסדר אפס‪.‬‬

    ‫חסמים מסדר אפס מתעלמים לחלוטין ממאפייני סדרת ההפסדים‪ .‬בפרט‪ ,‬ניתן לבחון מקרים שבהם‬
 ‫סכום ההפסדים של המומחה הטוב ביותר הוא קטן‪ .‬מסתבר שבאמצעות בחירת קצב לימוד שונה‪ ,‬ניתן‬
‫להשיג חסם על החרטה‪ ,‬שבו אורך המשחק מוחלף בסכום ההפסדים של המומחה הטוב היותר‪ ,‬וידוע גם‬
                                                                           ‫כחסם מסדר ראשון‪.‬‬

‫בחסמים נוספים‪ ,‬הידועים כחסמים מסדר שני‪ ,‬מוחלף אורך המשחק בגודל המודד את הווריאביליות של‬
 ‫סדרת ההפסדים‪ .‬התוצאה הראשונה מסוג זה הוכחה עבור אלגוריתם ‪ Polynomial Weights‬או ‪Prod‬‬
   ‫)‪ ,(Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2007‬שהוא מודיפיקציה קטנה אך משמעותית של ‪ .Hedge‬ספציפית‪ ,‬גורם‬
‫העדכון הכפלי ב‪ Hedge-‬מוחלף באלגוריתם ‪ Polynomial Weights‬בקירוב טיילור הלינארי שלו‪ .‬בחסם‬
   ‫החרטה של אלגוריתם זה מוחלף אורך המשחק בהשתנות הריבועית המקסימלית של מומחה כלשהו‪,‬‬
                                      ‫כשההשתנות הריבועית מוגדרת כסכום ריבועי ההפסדים‪.‬‬

                                                            ‫אופטימיזציה קמורה מקוונת‬

  ‫המודל של אופטימיזציה קמורה מקוונת )‪,(Zinkevich, 2003‬עוסק בבעיות קבלת החלטות סדרתיות‬
    ‫שבהן הלומד בוחר נקודה (החלטה) מתוך קבוצה קומפקטית וקמורה במרחב האוקלידי‪ ,‬וההפסד שלו‬
   ‫הוא הערך של פונקציה קמורה‪ ,‬הנבחרת על‪-‬ידי היריב‪ ,‬בנקודה שבחר‪ .‬החרטה של הלומד נמדדת ביחס‬
 ‫להחלטה הקבועה הטובה ביותר‪ .‬מודל זה הוא הכללה של מודל המומחה הטוב ביותר‪ ,‬שבו ההחלטות הן‬
   ‫וקטורי הסתברות ופונקציות ההפסד הן לינאריות‪ .‬הוא מקיף גם סוגים נוספים של בעיות‪ .‬דוגמא אחת‬
  ‫היא בעיית בחירת תיק השקעות‪ ,‬שבה הלומד מחליט בכל סיבוב כיצד לחלק את הונו בין נכסים שונים‪.‬‬
     ‫בדוגמא זו‪ ,‬ההחלטה היא עדיין וקטור הסתברות‪ ,‬אך פונקצית ההפסד היא לוגריתמית ולא לינארית‪.‬‬
        ‫דוגמא אחרת היא הבעיה של בחירת נתיב מקוונת‪ ,‬בה נהג בוחר בכל יום באיזו דרך לנסוע לעבודה‪,‬‬
       ‫והפסדו נמדד בזמן שהוא מבזבז בגין קטעי הכביש שבחר‪ .‬כאן ההחלטות הן וקטורים עם ערכי ‪,01/‬‬
          ‫המציינים אם קטע כביש נבחר או לא‪ ,‬ולא וקטורי הסתברות‪ .‬למרות שניתן לייצג בעיה זו במודל‬
‫המומחה הטוב ביותר‪ ,‬כאשר כל צירוף של קטעי כביש נחשב כמומחה‪ ,‬הרי שייצוג זה דורש מספר מעריכי‬
      ‫של מומחים‪ .‬חשוב לציין שהמודל הכללי יותר של ‪ Zinkevich‬מאפשר ליישם כלים חזקים מתחום‬
                                         ‫האופטימיזציה הקמורה בפיתוח אלגוריתמי מזעור חרטה‪.‬‬

‫בעבודה זו נתעניין במיוחד בתת‪-‬המודל שבו פונקציות היריב הן לינאריות‪ ,‬הקרוי אופטימיזציה לינארית‬
  ‫מקוונת‪ .‬ניתן להשיג למידה ללא חרטה במודל של אופטימיזציה לינארית מקוונת באמצעות אלגוריתם‬
  ‫‪ .)RFTL( Regularized Follow the Leader‬אלגוריתם זה הוא עידון של האלגוריתם החמדני הבוחר‬
      ‫בכל סיבוב את ההחלטה שהייתה ממזערת את ההפסד המצטבר עד לאותו רגע‪ ,‬או במילים אחרות‪,‬‬
‫אלגוריתם העוקב אחרי המוביל‪ .‬לעומתו‪ ,‬אלגוריתם ‪ RFTL‬בוחר את ההחלטה הממזערת את ההפסד עד‬
 ‫כה בתוספת גורם רגולריזציה‪ ,‬שהוא פונקציה קמורה חזק של ההחלטה‪ ,‬המחולק בפרמטר מספרי‪ ,‬קצב‬
 ‫הלימוד‪ ,‬הקובע את מידת השפעת הרגולריזציה‪ .‬אלגוריתם זה מכליל הן את ‪ ,Hedge‬והן את אלגוריתם‬
 ‫‪ ,Online Gradient Descent‬שהוצג על‪-‬ידי ‪ ,Zinkevich‬בבחירה מתאימה של פונקציות הרגולריזציה‪.‬‬




                                              ‫ב‬
 ‫נציין כי חסמי החרטה הבסיסיים ביותר עבור ‪ RFTL‬במודל האופטימיזציה הלינארית המקוונת תלויים‬
‫בשורש הריבועי של משך המשחק‪ .‬הקבועים תלויים בקוטר של קבוצת ההחלטות ובתכונות של פונקציות‬
‫ההפסד והרגולריזציה‪ .‬תלות זו היא אופטימלית‪ ,‬כפי שניתן להוכיח‪ ,‬בדומה למודל המומחה הטוב ביותר‪,‬‬
   ‫באמצעות בניית יריבים הבוחרים הפסדים אקראיים לחלוטין‪ .‬נעיר בקצרה כי בדומה למודל המומחה‬
 ‫הטוב ביותר‪ ,‬גם במודל זה פותחו חסמי חרטה מסדר שני‪ ,‬בהם מוחלף אורך המשחק במדדים שונים של‬
                                                        ‫הווריאביליות של סדרת ההפסדים‪.‬‬

                                        ‫היבטים נוספים של המשחק בין הלומד ליריב‬

‫בכל המודלים שתוארו לעיל קיימת אבחנה חשובה ביחס להיזון החוזר שמקבל הלומד בכל סיבוב‪ .‬למשל‪,‬‬
    ‫בהינתן קבוצת מומחים‪ ,‬החוזים את מזג האוויר‪ ,‬ללומד יש גישה להפסדים של כל המומחים‪ ,‬כלומר‬
 ‫מידע מלא‪ .‬בניגוד לכך‪ ,‬במקרה של שיבוץ פרסומות או בחירה מתוך אוסף מכונות מזל‪ ,‬הלומד מודע רק‬
   ‫להפסד של הפעולה שבחר‪ .‬סוג היזון חוזר זה ידוע כמודל השודד מרובה הזרועות‪ ,‬ונקרא כך בהתייחס‬
                                                                          ‫לסוג של מכונת מזל‪.‬‬

         ‫ניתן גם לעשות אבחנות ביחס לרמת הקושי של סדרת הבחירות של היריב‪ .‬כפי שכבר צוין‪ ,‬מידת‬
      ‫הווריאביליות של הסדרה (הניתנת למדידה בדרכים רבות) משפיעה על חסמי החרטה שהלומד יכול‬
‫להבטיח‪ .‬אינטואיטיבית‪ ,‬רמה נמוכה של ווריאביליות מסייעת ללומד לעקוב אחרי מהלכי היריב‪ .‬מלאכתו‬
‫של הלומד עשויה להיות קלה יותר גם אם יש יתירות בקבוצת המומחים‪ .‬למשל‪ ,‬אם יש רק מספר קטן של‬
   ‫מומחים איכותיים או אם מומחים רבים הם כמעט זהים למומחים אחרים‪ ,‬ניתן להבטיח חסמי חרטה‬
‫טובים יותר‪ .‬היבטים אלה ונוספים של נושא הלמידה המקוונת נדונים בפירוט בחלקה הראשון של עבודה‬
                                                                          ‫זו‪ ,‬בפרקים ‪ 3‬ו‪.4-‬‬

                                                                         ‫תמחור נגזרים‬
‫בחלק השני של העבודה מיושמת המתודולוגיה של מזעור חרטה לתמחור נגזרים‪ ,‬אחת הבעיות המרכזיות‬
   ‫במימון‪ .‬נגזר הוא נייר ערך שמחירו נקבע על סמך מחיר של נכס בסיס אחד או יותר‪ ,‬למשל‪ ,‬מניה‪ .‬סוג‬
      ‫חשוב של נגזר הוא אופציה‪ ,‬שהיא מכשיר פיננסי המאפשר למחזיק בו לקנות או למכור נכס מסוים‬
  ‫במחיר ובזמן נתונים‪ .‬למשל‪ ,‬אופציית רכש אירופאית מאפשרת לבעליה במועד הפקיעה שלה‪ , ,‬לקנות‬
                 ‫נכס עבור מחיר ‪ ,‬הנקרא מחיר המימוש‪ .‬כלומר‪ ,‬האופציה מעניקה לבעליה סכום של‬
  ‫הוא מחיר הנכס (מניה) בזמן ‪ .‬אופציה תקנית אחרת היא אופציית מכר אירופאית‪,‬‬       ‫בזמן ‪ ,‬כאשר‬
‫בזמן ‪.‬‬                  ‫המאפשרת לבעליה למכור נכס עבור מחיר ‪ ,‬או באופן שקול‪ ,‬לקבל סכום של‬

‫מלבד אופציות הרכש והמכר התקניות‪ ,‬קיימות אופציות רבות אחרות‪ ,‬הנסחרות ומפותחות כדי לענות על‬
    ‫צרכים מימוניים פרטניים‪ .‬אופציות אלה נקראות אופציות אקזוטיות‪ .‬דוגמא אחת היא אופציית רכש‬
     ‫אירופאית מסוג ‪ lookback‬עם מחיר מימוש קבוע‪ ,‬אשר במועד הפקיעה שלה‪ , ,‬מאפשרת לבעליה‬
   ‫לבחור את הזמן הטוב ביותר בדיעבד לקנות נכס בסיס מסוים במחיר ‪ .‬במילים אחרות‪ ,‬אופציית ה‪-‬‬
‫הוא מחיר הנכס המקסימלי‬       ‫בזמן ‪ ,‬כאשר‬                   ‫‪ lookback‬מעניקה לבעליה סכום של‬
                                                                        ‫בתקופת חיי האופציה‪.‬‬




                                             ‫ג‬
      ‫תחום תמחור הנגזרים הושפע מאוד‪ ,‬הן תיאורטית והן מעשית‪ ,‬מנוסחת התמחור של בלאק‪ ,‬שולס‬
   ‫ומרטון )‪ .(Black and Scholes, 1973; Merton 1973‬בעבודותיהם‪ ,‬שזיכו את כותביהן בפרס נובל‬
     ‫לכלכלה (למעט בלאק‪ ,‬שנפטר טרם הענקת הפרס)‪ ,‬הם מידלו את מחירן של מניות כתנועה בראונית‬
  ‫גיאומטרית והניחו שהשוק הוא ללא הזדמנויות ארביטראז'‪ ,‬כלומר‪ ,‬אין בו אפשרות לרווח חסר סיכון‪.‬‬

     ‫עם זאת‪ ,‬בהנחות של מודל בלאק‪-‬שולס‪-‬מרטון יש כמה בעיות ידועות‪ .‬ראשית‪ ,‬המודל הוא רק בגדר‬
 ‫הפשטה של שינויי המחיר בשוק‪ ,‬בעוד שבפועל המחירים הם בדידים ועשויים לקפוץ בחדות‪ ,‬והתשואות‬
‫היומיות אינן בלתי‪-‬תלויות ושוות התפלגות‪ .‬שנית‪ ,‬התנודתיות של המניה‪ ,‬שהיא הפרמטר העיקרי הנדרש‬
   ‫במודל‪ ,‬אינה נתונה ויש לשערכה‪ .‬למעשה‪ ,‬חישוב התנודתיות הנגזרת של המודל על סמך מחירי השוק‬
     ‫האמיתיים של אופציות רכש אירופאיות מניב ערכים שונים עבור מחירי מימוש שונים‪ ,‬אפילו ביחס‬
                                                                           ‫למועדי פקיעה זהים‪.‬‬

                                                    ‫על הקשר בין מזעור חרטה לתמחור‬

  ‫אי‪-‬ההתאמות האמפיריות של מודל בלאק‪-‬שולס‪-‬מרטון שימשו מוטיבציה להצגת מודל מסחר על בסיס‬
   ‫למידה מקוונת בעבודתם של דה מרזו‪ ,‬קרמר ומנצור )‪ .(DeMarzo et al., 2006‬במודל זה‪ ,‬שבו נעשה‬
‫שימוש גם בתזה זו‪ ,‬המסחר מתקיים בזמן בדיד ובהנחה שהשוק הוא ללא ארביטראז'‪ .‬ההגבלות היחידות‬
‫על מחיר המניה הן חסם על סכום ריבועי התשואות של המניה בכל תקופות המסחר (ההשתנות הריבועית)‬
‫וחסם על הערך המוחלט של התשואה בתקופת מסחר אחת‪ .‬חסם אפשרי נוסף הנבחן במודל ואשר מאומץ‬
   ‫בתזה זו‪ ,‬הוא חסם עליון על מחיר המניה‪ .‬מודל זה מאפשר בבירור קפיצות ותלות בין מחירים‪ ,‬תופעות‬
                                                                  ‫המאפיינות שווקים אמיתיים‪.‬‬

  ‫העבודה של )‪ (DeMarzo et al., 2006‬הראתה שבשוק ללא ארביטראז'‪ ,‬ניתן לגזור חסמים עליונים על‬
     ‫מחירי אופציות רכש אירופאיות בעזרת אלגוריתמי מסחר‪ ,‬המתבססים על אלגוריתמי מזעור חרטה‬
     ‫במודל המומחה הטוב ביותר‪ .‬תוצאה זו מתבססת על קשר יסודי בין אלגוריתמי מסחר לבין תמחור‬
  ‫נגזרים‪ ,‬המתואר להלן‪ .‬נניח שנתון נגזר‪ ,‬המבטיח לבעליו תשלום במועד עתידי נתון עבור מחיר כלשהו‪,‬‬
   ‫כאשר התשלום תלוי בהתפתחויות בשוק‪ .‬יהי עתה נתון אלגוריתם מסחר‪ ,‬המצריך השקעה התחלתית‬
  ‫כלשהי‪ ,‬ובאותו מועד עתידי מניב סכום‪ ,‬התלוי הן באסטרטגיית המסחר והן בהתפתחויות בשוק‪ .‬היות‬
    ‫שהשוק הוא ללא ארביטראז'‪ ,‬הרי שאילו הראינו‪ ,‬שבכל התפתחות עתידית אפשרית בשוק שווי נכסי‬
     ‫האלגוריתם עולה על הסכום המשולם למחזיק בנגזר‪ ,‬הרי שהסכום ההתחלתי המושקע באלגוריתם‬
    ‫בהכרח מהווה חסם עליון למחיר הנגזר‪ .‬יש לציין שעקרון דומה מאפשר הוכחת חסמים תחתונים על‬
                                                                                 ‫מחירי נגזרים‪.‬‬

  ‫כדי להראות חסם עליון על המחיר במקרה הפשוט במיוחד של אופציית רכש אירופאית‪ ,‬מספיק למצוא‬
   ‫אלגוריתם מסחר שסך נכסיו הסופיים עולה הן על מחיר המימוש והן על מחיר המניה הסופי‪ .‬למעשה‪,‬‬
    ‫עליו להתחרות תמיד בהצלחה מול הטובה מבין שתי אסטרטגיות‪ :‬זו המחזיקה בסכום המימוש‪ ,‬וזו‬
‫המחזיקה במניה מבלי לסחור בה‪ .‬באמצעות הסבת אלגוריתם מזעור חרטה לתסריט של מסחר‪ ,‬דה מרזו‪,‬‬
           ‫קרמר ומנצור הראו שניתן לתרגם חרטה נמוכה ליכולת מובטחת להתחרות בהצלחה מול שתי‬
   ‫אסטרטגיות אלה‪ .‬בחירתם הספציפית באלגוריתם ‪ Polynomial Weights‬אפשרה להם להוכיח חסמי‬
  ‫מחיר התלויים בהשתנות הריבועית של מחיר המניה אך לא במספר תקופות המסחר‪ .‬בכך הם קשרו את‬
‫המחיר בתנודתיות‪ ,‬בדומה לתמחור בלאק‪-‬שולס‪-‬מרטון‪ ,‬וכן אפשרו הגברת תדירות המסחר ללא השפעה‬
                                                                    ‫מפורשת על המחיר‪.‬‬


                                             ‫ד‬
      ‫תזה זו מרחיבה באופן ניכר את תחום תמחור הנגזרים באמצעות מזעור חרטה‪ .‬בחלקה השני נעשה‬
        ‫שימוש באלגוריתם מזעור החרטה של )‪ (DeMarzo et al., 2006‬לתמחור מגוון רחב של נגזרים‬
    ‫אקזוטיים כפונקציה של ההשתנות הריבועית‪ .‬בפרט‪ ,‬אלגוריתם זה משולב עם אלגוריתמי מסחר חד‪-‬‬
‫כיווניים (היכולים רק למכור מניות) לצורך הוכחת חסמים עליונים על מחירי אופציות ‪ .lookback‬בנוסף‪,‬‬
   ‫מוכחת נוסחה לתרגום ישיר של חסמים על ביצועי אלגוריתמים במודל המומחה הטוב ביותר לחסמים‬
 ‫בתסריט של מסחר‪ .‬בעזרת נוסחה זו מתאפשרת הוכחה של חסמים עליונים ותחתונים חדשים על מחירי‬
                            ‫נגזרים‪ ,‬בפרט כאלה המתבססים על תוצאות בחלקה הראשון של התזה‪.‬‬


                                                                  ‫תוכן העבודה‬
    ‫התוצאות המובאות בתזה זו מאורגנות בשני חלקים‪ .‬החלק הראשון עוסק בתיאוריה של אלגוריתמי‬
                                      ‫מזעור חרטה והחלק השני עוסק ביישומם לתמחור נגזרים‪.‬‬

                                                         ‫חלק ראשון‪ :‬מזעור חרטה‬
                             ‫חלק זה כולל את פרקים ‪ ,2-4‬כאשר פרק ‪ 2‬כולל רקע ואת עיקרי המודל‪.‬‬

                     ‫פרק ‪ :3‬חסמים תחתונים על חרטה של סדרות אינדיווידואליות‬

     ‫בפרק זה אנו מוכיחים חסמים תחתונים על חרטה‪ ,‬אשר תקפים לכל סדרת הפסדים שבוחר היריב‪.‬‬
 ‫חסמים אלה תלויים בהשתנות הריבועית של סדרת ההפסדים ותקפים למשפחות גדולות של אלגוריתמי‬
      ‫למידה במודל אופטימיזציה לינארית מקוונת‪ .‬תוצאות אלה שונות באופיין מהחסמים התחתונים‬
     ‫המקובלים‪ ,‬שמטרתם להראות את האופטימליות של חסמים עליונים על החרטה‪ ,‬ועל כן מסתפקים‬
                                                     ‫בהוכחת קיומן של סדרות הפסדים קשות‪.‬‬

 ‫ראשית‪ ,‬אנו נדרשים לשאלת אפיון אלגוריתמים שהם בעלי חרטה אי‪-‬שלילית לכל סדרה‪ .‬אנו מתמקדים‬
        ‫של וקטור‬   ‫כפונקציה רציפה‬       ‫באלגוריתמים אשר בכל זמן מגדירים את החלטתם הבאה‬
    ‫‪ .‬אנו מראים שלאלגוריתמים אלה יש חרטה אי‪-‬שלילית לכל‬      ‫ההפסדים המצטברים עד לאותו רגע‪,‬‬
 ‫היא גרדיינט של פונקצית פוטנציאל קעורה‪ ,‬וכי תכונה זו מאפיינת את כל האלגוריתמים‬    ‫סדרה‪ ,‬אםם‬
                                                                             ‫ממשפחת ‪.RFTL‬‬

    ‫התוצאה המרכזית בפרק זה מראה שקיום חסם עליון על החרטה גורר קיום חסם תחתון על החרטה‬
   ‫לכל סדרה עם השתנות‬           ‫המקסימלית במהלך המשחק‪ .‬בפרט‪ ,‬אם החסם העליון הוא מהצורה‬

     ‫‪ ,‬לכל סדרה עם השתנות‬           ‫ריבועית ‪ ,‬אזי החרטה המקסימלית לאורך המשחק היא בהכרח‬

‫𝛩‪ .‬תוצאה זו מוכחת לשתי מחלקות של פוטנציאלים גזירים פעמיים ברציפות‪ .‬מחלקה אחת‬         ‫ריבועית‬
 ‫כוללת פוטנציאלים עם הסיאן מוגדר שלילית בסביבה של וקטור האפס‪ ,‬ומכילה את ‪Online Gradient‬‬
‫‪ .Descent‬מחלקה שנייה כוללת פוטנציאלים במודל המומחה הטוב ביותר‪ ,‬המקיימים דרישות רגולריות‬
   ‫טבעיות‪ ,‬ומכילה את ‪ .Hedge‬בהקשר של המחלקה הראשונה אנו מודדים את ההשתנות הריבועית כ‪-‬‬
    ‫הוא וקטור ההפסדים שבוחר היריב בזמן ‪ .‬בהקשר של המחלקה השנייה‪ ,‬אנו‬       ‫‪ ,‬כאשר‬
           ‫משתמשים בהשתנות הריבועית היחסית‪ ,‬המהווה גודל מתאים יותר להקשר זה‪ ,‬ומוגדרת כ‪-‬‬



                                             ‫ה‬
‫‪ .‬נציין כי החסמים התחתונים עבור ‪ Hedge‬משמשים בפרק ‪ 8‬להוכחת‬
                                                                  ‫חסמים תחתונים למחירי אופציות‪.‬‬

                                                            ‫התוצאות בפרק זה פורסמו במאמר הבא‪:‬‬

‫‪E. Gofer and Y. Mansour.‬‬
‫‪Lower bounds on individual sequence regret.‬‬
‫‪In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pages 275–289, 2012.‬‬

                                                 ‫פרק ‪ :4‬מזעור חרטה למומחים מתפצלים‬

  ‫פרק זה מציג אלגוריתמים לווריאנט של מודל המומחה הטוב ביותר‪ ,‬שבו קבוצת המומחים יכולה לגדול‬
 ‫במהלך המשחק‪ .‬ספציפית‪ ,‬בווריאנט זה מומחים חדשים עשויים להתפצל בכל סיבוב מכל מומחה קיים‪,‬‬
     ‫על‪-‬פי בחירת היריב‪ ,‬תהליך היוצר מבנה של עץ‪ .‬אנו מראים כי אלגוריתם הממזער חרטה במודל זה‬
 ‫מאפשר גם השגת חסמי חרטה משופרים במודל המומחה הטוב ביותר הרגיל‪ ,‬במקרים של יתירות גבוהה‬
                                                                           ‫בקרב קבוצת המומחים‪.‬‬

          ‫אנו בוחנים את מודל המומחים המתפצלים הן בתסריט של מידע מלא‪ ,‬והן בתסריט השודד מרובה‬
‫הזרועות‪ .‬לתסריט הראשון אנו מציגים מודיפיקציה של אלגוריתם ‪ ,Hedge‬ומוכיחים עבורה חסמי חרטה‬
      ‫אופטימליים‪ .‬לתסריט השני אנו מוכיחים חסמי חרטה עבור מודיפיקציה של אלגוריתם ‪ ,Exp3‬שהוא‬
                        ‫גרסת ‪ Hedge‬המותאמת לתסריט השודד מרובה הזרועות )‪.(Auer et al., 2002‬‬

           ‫התוצאות במודל של מידע מלא מיושמות לשני תסריטים של יתירות בקבוצת המומחים‪ .‬בתסריט‬
     ‫הראשון‪ ,‬המומחה המוביל (כלומר‪ ,‬בעל ההפסד המצטבר הנמוך ביותר) בכל רגע במשחק מגיע מקבוצה‬
 ‫‪,‬‬                                  ‫קטנה של מומחים איכותיים‪ .‬בתסריט זה אנו מראים חסם חרטה של‬
          ‫מציין את ההפסד הכולל של‬      ‫מציין את מספר המובילים השונים במהלך המשחק‪ ,‬ו‪-‬‬       ‫כאשר‬
‫המומחה הטוב ביותר בסוף המשחק‪ ,‬כשהחסם עצמו אינו תלוי במספר המומחים‪ .‬יש לציין‪ ,‬כי תוצאה זו‬
                                    ‫תקפה גם אם נדרש סף מסוים של יתרון על מנת להפוך למוביל‪.‬‬

‫בתסריט אחר‪ ,‬ההפסדים הכוללים של כל המומחים מתרכזים סביב הערכים של מספר מומחים מצומצם‪.‬‬
      ‫קבוצות מומחים כך שההפרש בין ההפסדים הכוללים של זוג מומחים באותה‬            ‫ספציפית‪ ,‬קיימות‬
                            ‫במהלך המשחק‪ .‬עבור תסריט זה אנו מראים חסם של‬        ‫קבוצה אינו עולה על‬



                                                                                      ‫על החרטה‪.‬‬

          ‫חשוב להדגיש שהלומד אינו זקוק לכל מידע מוקדם לגבי זהות המובילים או הקבוצות‪ ,‬או אף לגבי‬
     ‫ו‪-‬‬         ‫מספרם‪ .‬כמו כן‪ ,‬החסמים בשני התסריטים הם למעשה אופטימליים‪ :‬הגורמים העיקריים‪,‬‬

                                                     ‫‪ ,‬ניתנים לשיפור רק בפקטורים קבועים‪.‬‬

                                                                   ‫פרק זה מתבסס על המאמר הבא‪:‬‬



                                                 ‫ו‬
‫‪E. Gofer, N. Cesa-Bianchi, C. Gentile, and Y. Mansour.‬‬
‫‪Regret minimization for branching experts.‬‬
‫‪Journal of Machine Learning Research - Proceedings Track, 30:618–638, 2013.‬‬


                                                          ‫חלק שני‪ :‬תמחור נגזרים‬
                   ‫חלק זה כולל את פרקים ‪ ,5-8‬כאשר פרק ‪ 5‬משמש למתן רקע והצגת עיקרי המודל‪.‬‬

                                                        ‫פרק ‪ :6‬תמחור נגזרים אקזוטיים‬

 ‫פרק זה מיישם מתודולוגית מזעור חרטה לתמחור מגוון נגזרים אקזוטיים‪ ,‬ומכליל בכך את התוצאה של‬
    ‫)‪ .(DeMarzo et al., 2006‬הפרק כולל חסמים עליונים למחירים של אופציות ‪ ,exchange‬אופציות‬
     ‫‪ ,shout‬אופציות ‪ ,lookback‬אופציות רכש עם מחיר מימוש ממוצע ואופציות רכש על מחיר ממוצע‪.‬‬
  ‫חסמים אלה מתבססים על חסם עליון על המחיר של אופציה המשלמת בזמן עתידי את המקסימום של‬
   ‫מחירי מספר נגזרים‪ .‬אופציה זו מתומחרת על בסיס חסמי חרטה כפליים‪ ,‬כלומר חסמים תחתונים על‬
  ‫היחס בין ההון הסופי של אלגוריתם מסחר לשווי הסופי של הנגזרים האמורים‪ .‬יתר האופציות מובעות‬
  ‫בלשון האופציה הזו ומתומחרות על סמך התמחור שלה‪ .‬הניתוח משתמש ברכיב מזעור חרטה זהה לזה‬
      ‫של )‪ ,(DeMarzo et al., 2006‬וחסמי המחיר תלויים בהשתנות הריבועית של מחיר נכסי הבסיס‪.‬‬

    ‫בפרק זה מוצג גם תמחור מבוסס מזעור חרטה של כל נגזר המעניק לבעליו בזמן עתידי תשלום שהוא‬
      ‫פונקציה קמורה של מחירה של מניה באותו זמן‪ .‬נגזרים אלה שקולים לתיק של אופציות רכש ללא‬
         ‫פוזיציות בחסר‪ ,‬ולכן ניתן להשתמש בחסמים עליונים על מחירי אופציות רכש‪ ,‬כדוגמת זה של‬
                                       ‫)‪ ,(DeMarzo et al., 2006‬להוכחת חסם עליון על מחירם‪.‬‬

                                                             ‫פרק זה מתבסס על המאמר הבא‪:‬‬

‫‪E. Gofer and Y. Mansour.‬‬
‫‪Pricing exotic derivatives using regret minimization.‬‬
‫‪In Algorithmic Game Theory, pages 266–277, 2011.‬‬

                                      ‫פרק ‪ :7‬בחינה מקרוב של אופציות ‪Lookback‬‬

   ‫בפרק זה אנו מציגים משפחה של אלגוריתמי מזעור חרטה‪ ,‬המשלבת שני רכיבים אלגוריתמיים‪ :‬רכיב‬
‫מזעור חרטה‪ ,‬ורכיב מסחר חד‪-‬כיווני‪ ,‬אשר כשמו‪ ,‬יכול רק למכור בהדרגה אחזקות במניה נתונה‪ .‬ביצועי‬
                  ‫שני הרכיבים יחדיו מתורגמים לחסמים עליונים על המחיר של אופציות ‪.lookback‬‬

 ‫הניתוח המובא משתמש באלגוריתם של )‪ (DeMarzo et al., 2006‬בתור רכיב מזעור החרטה‪ ,‬ובוחן שני‬
   ‫כיוונים עיקריים באשר לרכיב המסחר החד‪-‬כיווני‪ .‬כיוון אחד הוא הפעלת כלל מכירה ספציפי מבוסס‬
‫מחיר‪ ,‬אשר בעזרתו מתקבל חסם מחיר קונקרטי‪ .‬כיוון אחר מנתח את מחיר האופציה כפונקציה של יחס‬
‫התחרותיות של אלגוריתם מסחר חד‪-‬כיווני כללי‪ ,‬כלומר‪ ,‬חסם עליון על היחס בין המחיר המקסימלי של‬
‫המניה לבין ההון המתקבל משימוש באלגוריתם המסחר‪ .‬בפרט‪ ,‬הדבר מאפשר שימוש באלגוריתם מסחר‬




                                            ‫ז‬
  ‫חד‪-‬כיווני אופטימלי עבור המודל שהוצג בעבודתם של אל‪-‬יניב‪ ,‬פיאט‪ ,‬קארפ וטרפין ‪(El-Yaniv et al.,‬‬
                           ‫)‪ .2001‬שני סוגי החסמים תלויים גם בהשתנות הריבועית של מחיר המניה‪.‬‬

      ‫אנו מראים שהאלגוריתמים המשולבים שאנו מציגים עשויים לשפר את יחס התחרותיות האופטימלי‬
      ‫המוכח במודל של )‪ .(El-Yaniv et al., 2001‬הסיבה לכך כפולה‪ :‬ככלל‪ ,‬האלגוריתמים המשולבים גם‬
         ‫קונים וגם מוכרים את המניה‪ ,‬וכמו כן‪ ,‬המודל בו אנו עובדים מניח חסם על ההשתנות הריבועית‪.‬‬

                                                                ‫פרק זה מתבסס על המאמר הבא‪:‬‬

‫‪E. Gofer and Y. Mansour.‬‬
‫‪Regret minimization algorithms for pricing lookback options.‬‬
‫‪In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pages 234–248, 2011.‬‬

                                             ‫פרק ‪ :8‬תמחור המבוסס על חרטה חיבורית‬

       ‫תוצאות תמחור הנגזרים המובאות בפרקים ‪ 6‬ו‪ 7-‬מתבססות על חסמים תחתונים על היחס בין ההון‬
‫הסופי של אלגוריתמי מסחר לבין השווי הסופי של נגזרים מסוימים‪ .‬מכיוון שהשוק הוא ללא ארביטראז'‪,‬‬
                                      ‫נובעים מחסמים אלה גם חסמים עליונים על מחירי אופציות‪.‬‬

         ‫בליבה של שיטה זו מצוי אלגוריתם ‪ Polynomial Weights‬למודל המומחה הטוב ביותר‪ ,‬שהוסב‬
 ‫לאלגוריתם מסחר (הנקרא ‪ )Generic‬בעבודה של )‪ .(DeMarzo et al., 2006‬הסבה זו‪ ,‬שהצריכה שינוי‬
         ‫של האלגוריתם ואנליזה חדשה של ביצועיו‪ ,‬מצביעה הן על הקשר היסודי בין אלגוריתמים למודל‬
          ‫המומחה הטוב ביותר לאלגוריתמי מסחר והן על הקושי בתרגום התוצאות ממודל אחד למשנהו‪.‬‬

‫בפרק ‪ 8‬אנו מפתחים שיטות לתרגום ישיר של חסמי חרטה של אלגוריתמים במודל המומחה הטוב ביותר‬
‫לחסמים על היחס בין ההון הסופי של אלגוריתמי מסחר לבין השווי הסופי של הנכסים הנסחרים‪ .‬באופן‬
     ‫זה‪ ,‬אנו מסוגלים להסב תוצאות קיימות מעולם מזעור החרטה לעולם התמחור ללא צורך בשינויים‬
   ‫אלגוריתמיים או בניתוח מחודש‪ .‬בדרך זו אנו מוכיחים חסמים עליונים ותחתונים על מחירי אופציות‬
                     ‫ועושים זאת אף במודלים כלליים יותר מאשר המודל של דה מרזו‪ ,‬קרמר ומנצור‪.‬‬

      ‫בפרט‪ ,‬אנו מוכיחים חסמים תחתונים על המחיר של אופציות רכש אירופאיות בכסף‪ ,‬כלומר עם מחיר‬
  ‫מימוש השווה למחיר ההתחלתי של המניה‪ .‬תוצאות אלה עושות שימוש בחסמים תחתונים על החרטה‬
                                           ‫המקסימלית של אלגוריתם ‪ ,Hedge‬אשר פותחו בפרק ‪.3‬‬

      ‫‪ ,‬כאשר‬                      ‫עבור אופציות אלה אנו מוכיחים‪ ,‬בין השאר‪ ,‬שאם נתון מראש הערך‬
           ‫‪.‬‬       ‫‪ ,‬הרי שמחיר האופציה חסום מלרע על‪-‬ידי‬        ‫הוא התשואה של המניה בזמן ‪ ,‬ו‪-‬‬

  ‫‪.‬‬               ‫בהשוואה‪ ,‬במודל בלאק‪-‬שולס‪-‬מרטון המחיר האסימפטוטי (לערכי קטנים) מקביל ל‪-‬‬
‫כלומר‪ ,‬ההתנהגות האסימפטוטית של שני החסמים זהה‪ ,‬למרות ההנחות המחמירות יותר‪ ,‬ובפרט‪ ,‬הנחת‬
       ‫המוכח בעבודה של ‪(DeMarzo et al.,‬‬        ‫היריב‪ ,‬במודל שלנו‪ .‬תוצאה זו משפרת חסם קודם של‬
                                                                                       ‫)‪.2006‬‬

                                                     ‫פרק זה מתבסס בחלקו על תוצאות מהמאמר‪:‬‬


                                              ‫ח‬
E. Gofer and Y. Mansour.
Lower bounds on individual sequence regret.
In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pages 275–289, 2012.




                                         ‫ט‬
‫י‬
