Predictive
Marketing
Predictive
Marketing
 Easy Ways Every Marketer
Can Use Customer Analytics
       and Big Data


     Ömer Artun, PhD
     Dominique Levin
This book is printed on acid-free paper. ♾

Copyright © 2015 by AgilOne. All rights reserved

Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
Published simultaneously in Canada

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the
prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate
per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923,
(978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher
for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at
www.wiley.com/go/permissions.

Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with the respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be
suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the
publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages arising herefrom.

For general information about our other products and services, please contact our Customer Care
Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993
or fax (317) 572-4002.

Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material
included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in
print-on-demand. If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the
version you purchased, you may download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more
information about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Artun, Omer, 1969–
  Predictive marketing : easy ways every marketer can use customer analytics and big data /
Omer Artun, Dominique Levin.
      pages cm
  Includes index.
    ISBN 978-1-119-03736-1 (hardback)
    ISBN 978-1-119-03732-3 (ePDF)
    ISBN 978-1-119-03733-0 (ePub)
 1. Marketing. I. Levin, Dominique, 1971– II. Title.
  HF5415.A7458 2015
  658.8—dc23
                                                                               2015013473

Cover image: Wiley
Cover design: Abstract Shoppers © Maciej Noskwoski/GettyImages

Printed in the United States of America

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
                         Dedicated to

   My darling wife Dr. Burcak Artun for always believing in me
                                                    Ömer Artun

My husband Eilam Levin without whom it would not be worthwhile
                                              Dominique Levin
CONTENTS




Introduction: Who Should Read This Book                        ix

PART 1       A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer            1
Chapter 1    Big Data and Predictive Analytics Are Now
             Easily Accessible to All Marketers                 3
Chapter 2    An Easy Primer to Predictive Analytics
             for Marketers                                     23
Chapter 3    Get to Know Your Customers First: Build
             Complete Customer Profiles                        43
Chapter 4    Managing Your Customers as a Portfolio
             to Improve Your Valuation                        63

PART 2       Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with
             Predictive Marketing                             75
Chapter 5    Play One: Optimize Your Marketing Spending
             Using Customer Data                               77
Chapter 6    Play Two: Predict Customer Personas and
             Make Marketing Relevant Again                     93
Chapter 7    Play Three: Predict the Customer Journey
             for Life Cycle Marketing                         103
Chapter 8    Play Four: Predict Customer Value and
             Value-Based Marketing                            115
Chapter 9    Play Five: Predict Likelihood to Buy or Engage
             to Rank Customers                                123

                                                                    vii
viii                                  Contents

       Chapter 10 Play Six: Predict Individual Recommendations
                  for Each Customer                                 137
       Chapter 11 Play Seven: Launch Predictive Programs
                  to Convert More Customers                         145
       Chapter 12 Play Eight: Launch Predictive Programs
                  to Grow Customer Value                            155
       Chapter 13 Play Nine: Launch Predictive Programs
                  to Retain More Customers                          169

       PART 3        How to Become a True Predictive
                     Marketing Ninja                                183
       Chapter 14 An Easy-to-Use Checklist of Predictive
                  Marketing Capabilities                            185
       Chapter 15 An Overview of Predictive (and Related)
                  Marketing Technology                              197
       Chapter 16 Career Advice for Aspiring Predictive Marketers   209
       Chapter 17 Privacy and the Difference Between Delightful
                  and Invasive                                      215
       Chapter 18 The Future of Predictive Marketing                221

       Appendix: Overview of Customer Data Types                    229

       Index                                                        237
INTRODUCTION: WHO SHOULD READ
THIS BOOK




T   his book is for everyday marketers who want to learn what predictive
    marketing is all about, as well as for those marketers who are ready
to use predictive marketing in their organizations. Whether you are just
getting started with your research, or have already begun to implement
predictive marketing, you will find many practical tips in this book.
    We share what marketers at companies large and small should know
about predictive marketing. We show you how to achieve the same large
returns as early adopters such as Harrah’s Entertainment, Amazon, and
Netflix. We also give you a practical guidebook to help you get started
with this new way of marketing. And above all, we share stories from
companies small and large, from retail to publishing, to software to man-
ufacturing. All of these marketers have achieved revolutionary returns,
and so can you.


About This Book
We are passionate about improving the quality of marketing and about
arming marketers with the knowledge and tools they need to make mar-
keting relevant again. We hope that the chapters that follow give mar-
keters the vocabulary and the inspiration to start to understand and use
big data and machine learning–powered marketing. We believe this will
lead to a win-win for customers, businesses, and marketers. Customers
will have more relevant and meaningful experiences, businesses will be
able to build more profitable customer relationships, and marketers will
gain visibility and respect within their organizations. We look forward to
continuing the dialogue on our website www.predictivemarketingbook
.com, the “Predictive Marketing Book” LinkedIn group (https://www
.linkedin.com/groups?gid=8292127), or via twitter.com/agilone.

                                                                             ix
x                   Introduction: Who Should Read This Book

         This book is divided in three main parts. The first part, “A Complete
    Predictive Marketing Primer,” introduces many of the foundational ele-
    ments in predictive marketing, including what is happening under the
    hood of predictive marketing software, how data science and predictive
    analytics work, and what are fundamentals behind the customer life-
    time value concept. The second part of the book, “Nine Easy Plays to
    Get Started with Predictive Marketing,” is a playbook with concrete
    strategies to get you started with predictive marketing. The last part of
    the book, “How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja,” gives
    an overview of predictive marketing technologies, some career advice
    for marketers, and looks at privacy and the future of predictive mar-
    keting. Many of the chapters can be read as stand-alone essays, so use
    the executive summary below to jump to the chapters that are most
    relevant to you.

    What Is in This Book
    Chapter 1: Big Data and Predictive Analytics
    Are Now Easily Accessible to All Marketers
    Predictive marketing is a new way of thinking about customer relation-
    ships, powered by new technologies in big data and machine learning,
    which we collectively call predictive analytics. Marketers better pay atten-
    tion to predictive analytics. Applying predictive analytics is the biggest
    game-changing opportunity since the Internet went mainstream almost
    20 years ago. Although some large brands have been using pieces of pre-
    dictive marketing for many years now, we are still in the early stages
    of adoption, and this is the right time to get started. The adoption of
    predictive marketing is accelerating among companies large and small
    because: (a) customers are demanding more meaningful relationships
    with brands, (b) early adopters show that predictive marketing delivers
    enormous value, and (c) new technologies are available to make predictive
    marketing easy.

    Chapter 2: An Easy Primer to Predictive
    Analytics for Marketers
    Many marketers want to at least understand what is happening in the pre-
    dictive analytics black box, to more confidently apply these models or to
                     Introduction: Who Should Read This Book                     xi

be able to communicate with data scientists. After reading this chapter
marketers will have a good understanding of the entire predictive analyt-
ics process. There are three types of predictive analytics models that mar-
keters should know about: unsupervised learning, supervised learning,
and reinforcement learning. Many marketers don’t realize that 80 percent
of the work associated with predicting future customer behavior is going
towards collecting and cleaning customer data. This data janitor work is
not glamorous but essential: without accurate and complete customer
data, there can be no meaningful customer analytics.

Chapter 3: Get to Know Your Customers First:
Build Complete Customer Profiles
Building complete and accurate customer profiles is no easy task, but it
has a lot of value. If yours is like most companies, customer data is all over
the place, full of errors and duplicates and not accessible to everyday mar-
keters. Fortunately, predictive technology, including fuzzy matching, can
help—at least some—to clean up your data mess and to connect online
and offline data to resolve customer identities across the digital and physi-
cal divide. Just getting all customer data in one place has enormous value,
and making customer profiles accessible to customer-facing personnel
throughout the organization is a great first step to start to deliver better
experiences to each and every customer.

Chapter 4: Managing Your Customers as
a Portfolio to Improve Your Valuation
It is our strong belief that the best way for any business to optimize
enterprise value is to optimize the customer lifetime value of each and
every customer. Customers are the unit of value for any company and
therefore customer lifetime value is the most important metric in mar-
keting. If you maximize the lifetime value, or profitability, of each and
every customer, you also maximize the profitability and valuation of your
company as a whole. The best way to optimize lifetime value for all cus-
tomers is to manage your customers as if they were a stock portfolio.
You take different actions and send different messages for customers
who are brand-new than for those who have been doing business with
you for a while. You will need to adjust your thinking and budget for
unprofitable, medium-value, and high-value customers.
xii                    Introduction: Who Should Read This Book

      Chapter 5: Play One: Optimize Your Marketing
      Spending Using Customer Data
      When asked to allocate marketing budgets, most marketers immediately
      think about acquisition spending and about allocating budget to the
      best performing channels and products. However, the predictive mar-
      keting way to allocate spending is based on allocating dollars to the right
      people, rather than to the right products or channels. Most companies
      are focused on acquisition, whereas they could achieve growth more
      cost-effectively by focusing more of their time and budget on retention
      and reactivation of customers. Marketers should learn to allocate budgets
      based on their goals to acquire, retain, and reactivate customers and to
      find products and channels that deliver the highest value customers.

      Chapter 6: Play Two: Predict Customer Personas
      and Make Marketing Relevant Again
      We will look at the predictive technique of clustering and how it is
      different from classical customer segmentation. Clustering is a power-
      ful tool in order to discover personas or communities in your customer
      base. Specifically, in this chapter we look at product-based, brand-based,
      and behavior-based clusters as examples. Clustering can be used to gain
      insight into differences in customers’ needs, behaviors, demographics,
      attitudes, and preferences regarding marketing interactions, products,
      and service usage. Using these clusters, you can also start to differentiate
      and optimize both marketing actions and product strategy for different
      groups of customers.

      Chapter 7: Play Three: Predict the Customer
      Journey for Life Cycle Marketing
      In this chapter we look at the customer life cycle in more detail, from
      acquisition, to growth, and to retention and see how your engagement
      strategy should evolve with each and every customer during the life
      cycle. The basic principle of optimizing customer lifetime value is the
      same for all stages of the life cycle and can be summarized in three words:
      give to get. Customers are much more likely to buy from you if they trust
      you. The best way to gain trust is to deliver an experience of value. So to
      get customer value, give customer value.
                    Introduction: Who Should Read This Book                   xiii

Chapter 8: Play Four: Predict Customer Value
and Value-Based Marketing
Not all customers have equal lifetime value. Any business will have
high-value customers, medium-value customers, and low lifetime value
customers. There is an opportunity to create enterprise value by crafting
marketing strategies that are differentiated based on the value of the cus-
tomer. This practice to segment and target by customer lifetime value is
called value-based marketing. Spend more money to appreciate and retain
high-value customers. Upsell to medium-value customers in order to
migrate these customers to higher value segments. Finally, reduce your
costs to service low-value or unprofitable customers.

Chapter 9: Play Five: Predict Likelihood to Buy
or Engage to Rank Customers
Likelihood to buy models is what most people think about when you
use the word predictive analytics. With these models you can predict the
likelihood of a certain type of future behavior of a customer. In this
chapter we look at programs based on likelihood to buy predictions
spanning both consumer and business marketing. We see how in busi-
ness marketing predictive lead scoring or customer scoring can optimize
the time of your sales and customer success teams. We also show you
how consumer marketers can optimize their discount strategy and the
frequency of their emails based on propensity models.

Chapter 10: Play Six: Predict Individual
Recommendations for Each Customer
Another popular predictive technique is personalized recommendations.
In this chapter we provide marketers a primer on recommendations and
we teach you about different types of recommendations. We explore
recommendations made at the time of purchase versus those made as a
follow-up to a purchase, and recommendations that are tied to specific
products versus those that are tied to specific customer profiles. We also
discuss what can go wrong when making personalized recommenda-
tions, and we highlight the need for merchandising rules, omni-channel
orchestration, and giving customers control when making personal
recommendations.
xiv                    Introduction: Who Should Read This Book

      Chapter 11: Play Seven: Launch Predictive Programs
      to Convert More Customers
      In this chapter we cover three specific predictive marketing strategies
      that can help you acquire more, and better, customers: using personas to
      design better acquisition campaigns, using remarketing to increase con-
      version and using look alike targeting. When it comes to remarketing,
      you should be able to differentiate between customers who are likely
      to come back, and send them a simple reminder, versus those who are
      unlikely to come back and may need an additional incentive. This is
      true for abandoned cart, browse, and search campaigns. Using looka-
      like targeting features of Facebook and other advertising platforms, you
      can find more customers who look just like your existing customers, for
      example, new customers just like your best customers.


      Chapter 12: Play Eight: Launch Predictive
      Programs to Grow Customer Value
      The secret to retaining a customer is to start trying to keep the customer
      the day you acquire her. The initial transaction is just the beginning
      of a long relationship that needs to be nurtured and developed.
      Engagement with customers should not stop when you convert a
      prospect into a buyer. In this chapter we cover a number of specific pre-
      dictive marketing strategies to help grow customer value: postpurchase
      campaigns, replenishment campaigns, repeat purchase programs, new
      product introductions, and customer appreciation campaigns. We will
      also discuss loyalty programs and omni-channel marketing in the age of
      predictive analytics.


      Chapter 13: Play Nine: Launch Predictive
      Programs to Retain More Customers
      We recommend you focus on dollar value retention. If you don’t, you
      could be retaining customers, but losing money anyway. Also, when
      measuring customer retention it is important to realize that not all churn
      is created equal. Losing an unprofitable customer is not nearly as bad
      as losing one of your best customers. Also, it is a lot easier, cheaper,
      and more effective to try and prevent a customer from leaving than
                   Introduction: Who Should Read This Book                  xv

it is to reactivate that customer after she has already stopped shopping
with you. In this chapter we look at different churn management pro-
grams, from untargeted, applying equally to all your customers, to tar-
geted, and we will cover proactive retention management and customer
reactivation campaigns.

Chapter 14: An Easy-to-Use Checklist of Predictive
Marketing Capabilities
In order to use the predictive marketing techniques discussed in this
book you need to acquire both a predictive marketing mind-set as
well as certain predictive marketing technical capabilities. You need to
evolve your thinking from being focused on campaigns, channels, and
one-size-fits-all marketing to being focused on individual customers
and their context. From a technology point of view you need to acquire
basic capabilities in the areas of customer data integration, predictive
intelligence, and campaign automation.

Chapter 15: An Overview of Predictive (and Related)
Marketing Technology
We live in an exciting and somewhat confusing time. A large number of
new marketing technologies are becoming available every year. In this
chapter, we will give you a high-level overview of the various types of
commercially available technologies and describe what it would take to
build a predictive marketing solution in-house from the ground up.

Chapter 16: Career Advice for Aspiring
Predictive Marketers
There is a huge career opportunity that comes from being an early
adopter of new methodologies and technologies, predictive marketing
and predictive analytics included. If you are uncomfortable with num-
bers and math, and fearful of getting started with predictive marketing,
there are a couple of things you should know: business understanding
trumps math, asking the right questions goes a long way, the best mar-
keters blend the art and science of marketing, and there is a lot you can
learn from others.
xvi                   Introduction: Who Should Read This Book

      Chapter 17: Privacy and the Difference Between
      Delightful and Invasive
      In general, consumers are willing to share preference information in
      exchange for apparent benefits, such as convenience, from using per-
      sonalized products and services. When it comes to personalization,
      there are different types of customer information that can be used and
      consumers may feel different about one type of information over the
      other. Use common sense when considering whether a marketing cam-
      paign is delightful or creepy and consider the context of the situation.
      This chapter will provide some guidelines for dealing with customer data
      that will engender trust.


      Chapter 18: The Future of Predictive Marketing
      Predictive analytics will continue to find new applications inside and
      beyond marketing. Not only will more algorithms become available,
      but real-time customer insights will start to shape our physical world,
      including the store of the future. There are huge benefits for customers,
      companies, and marketers alike to get started with predictive marketing
      sooner rather than later. Sooner or later your customers and competitors
      will force you to adopt a predictive marketing mind-set, so you might as
      well be an early adopter and derive a huge competitive advantage.


      About the Authors
      Omer Artun
      I am a scientist by training; I am an entrepreneur at heart, driven by
      curiosity of knowledge and challenging status quo. In elementary school,
      I saw the opportunity to make a profit collecting fruit from mulberry
      trees from our school backyard and selling it on the street, enlisting
      my schoolmates to help me run this small business. With some prod-
      ding from my engineer parents, I followed in my older brother’s foot-
      steps to enter a PhD program in physics at Brown University, studying
      under Leon Cooper at The Institute for Brain and Neural Systems.
      Dr. Cooper has received the Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on
      superconductivity and later decided that the next big problem to solve
                   Introduction: Who Should Read This Book                   xvii

was in neuroscience, decoding how we learn and adapt. He is a pioneer
in learning theory since the early 70s, using both experimental neuro-
science as a base as well as statistical techniques for understanding and
creating learning systems, now popularly called machine learning. I worked
on both biological mechanisms that underlie learning and memory stor-
age as well as construction of artificial neural networks, networks that
can learn, associate, and reproduce such higher level cognitive acts as
abstraction, computation, and language acquisition. Although these tasks
are carried out easily by humans, they have not been easy to embody as
conventional computer program.
      As I was getting close to graduating from the PhD program at Brown
University around 1998, I noticed that the business world was mostly
running on simple spreadsheets, and I wanted to apply a data science
and machine-learning approach to business. This goal led me to work for
McKinsey & Co., the premier strategy consulting firm that helps large
companies formulate strategies based on a fact-based problem solving
approach.
      When I joined McKinsey & Co. in 1999, I was able to test drive
some of this data scientific approach in a few studies. My first project
was to help a large technology company improve sales coverage, scien-
tifically matching the sales team with the customers based on customer
needs, sales team’s skill, and experience. The CEO was impressed with
the results on paper, but was unable to operationalize the results in real
life, in a repeatable way. This is what I call the last mile problem of
analytics. I realized that this is a big problem to solve. Analytics is an
important enabler in improving commercial efficiency, but can only cre-
ate value if it becomes part of the day-to-day execution workflow. I saw
this theme repeat over and over again in many areas of business, pricing,
supply chain, marketing, and sales. Most McKinsey projects I have been
part of ended up on a slide deck which had all the right answers but
very rarely created any real value. Equipped with McKinsey training, I
joined one of my clients, Micro Warehouse as VP of Marketing, in 2002,
with the goal to bring data science to everyday operations. I was lucky
to be empowered by the CEO Jerry York and President Kirby Myers.
Jerry was the most analytically driven person I ever knew in business,
still to this day. He was previously CFO of IBM during Gerstner years,
and CFO of Chrysler before that. He encouraged me to use data science
to help him run the business better.
xviii                     Introduction: Who Should Read This Book

             I knew I had to architect my approach in a way that married data
        science with execution to solve the last mile problem. I had two impor-
        tant recruits, Dr. Michel Nahon, a brilliant Yale-trained applied math-
        ematician who helped me with machine-learning algorithms, and the
        hacker extraordinaire Glen Demeraski, who helped me with everything
        database and application related. I created approaches and systems that
        used data to more efficiently allocate resources, reduce marketing costs,
        and uncover new revenue sources. We had significant impact on mar-
        keting efficiency, pricing, and discounting patterns as well as salesforce
        effectiveness. In early 2003 we had real-time systems alerting purchase,
        pricing, and customer acquisition patterns of the sales team compared to
        moving averages to take immediate action by the sales leadership. After
        Micro Warehouse, from 2004 to 2006, I joined Best Buy as Senior Direc-
        tor of Business-to-Business marketing of its newly founded Best Buy for
        Business division. Best Buy at the time also struggled with the same exact
        last mile problem, lots of internal resources, tools, many high-flying con-
        sultants talking about customer segmentation, and analytics, but when
        you walked into a store, none of that had any impact at the customer
        level. This is the true test of analytics; does it impact the customers in a
        positive way that they can experience it? If not, then you have the wrong
        setup. Making progress at Best Buy was much more difficult, which I will
        touch on in Chapter 1.
             While working at Micro Warehouse and Best Buy, I was also a
        regular guest lecturer at Columbia University and NYU Stern MBA
        programs Relationship Marketing and Pricing courses that Dr. Hitendra
        Wadhwa taught. I also became an Adjunct Professor at NYU Stern for
        Spring 2006, teaching the MBA level Relationship Marketing program.
        During this period, talking to students, doing market research, talking to
        colleagues at different companies, I postulated that data-driven predic-
        tive marketing would become the new paradigm for the next 10 years.
        The value of predictive marketing was already clear to me, but its impor-
        tance has accelerated due to digital transformation of commerce, increase
        in customer touch-points, and exponential increase in the size, variety,
        and velocity of data (which is now popularly called “big data”).
             If you ask me what is the one important thing I learned from
        Dr. Cooper, I would say that it is breaking the problem down to its core
        and solving it at a fundamental level. He always said the idea behind the
        solution to any problem has to be clean and very simple. This is how I
                    Introduction: Who Should Read This Book                    xix

thought about the marketer’s problem. Marketing was easy in the days
of the old corner store. People knew our name, our likes and dislikes,
and treated us on a one-to-one basis. Marketers lost touch with their
customers in the era of one-size-fits-all mass optimization. Customers
became survey responders and focus group participants; it was all
about products and channels. However, the need for customer-centric
marketing has always been there, it just wasn’t practical and cost effective
to practice. Digital transformation including web, email, mobile, social,
location technologies combined with technologies to store, process,
and extract information has significantly changed what is practical and
cost effective.
     Predictive marketing is the approach that restores that personal touch
by bringing that human sensibility into our digital and offline lives, by
focusing on the consumers individually to understand what they did and
what they will do next. Predictive analytics, based on machine-learning
algorithms, offers enormous leverage to marketers trying to make sense
of these actions. Rather than replacing human decision making, machine
learning and complex algorithms could help people amplify their intel-
ligence and deal with problems on a much larger scale, something like
giving a bulldozer to people used to digging with a shovel.
     I saw the opportunity to solve a problem that a growing number
of companies were struggling with, and I decided to disrupt the status
quo and solve this problem. In 2006, I founded AgilOne, to bring the
power of big data and predictive analytics to everyday marketers with an
easy-to-use, yet powerful, cloud-based software platform.
     AgilOne was initially bootstrapped for the first 5 years, then backed
by top tier VC firms including Sequoia Capital, Mayfield Fund, Tenaya
Capital, and Next World Capital. We are helping more than 150
brands in retail, B2B, Internet, media, publishing, and education deliver
relevant experiences across channels. Through complete and accurate
customer profiles, predictive insights, and built-in life cycle marketing
campaigns, marketers boost customer loyalty and increase customer
lifetime value.
     In my spare time, I claim to be an accomplished potter of 28 years,
having studied at Rhode Island School of Design under Lawrence Bush
during my years at Brown. A native of Turkey, I now live in Los Gatos
with my wife Burcak and two daughters, Ayse and Leyla. As I write this
introduction, my daughter Ayse, who is a freshman at Castilleja School
xx                     Introduction: Who Should Read This Book

     in Palo Alto, is reading an article about predictive marketing for her math
     class, which shows how predictive marketing will become mainstream
     for the next generation.


     Dominique Levin
     I credit my education, a combination of engineering school, design
     school, and business school for my left-brain–right-brain approach to
     marketing: I have a master’s of science (Cum Laude) in industrial design
     engineering from Delft University in The Netherlands and a master’s
     of business administration (with Distinction) from Harvard University.
     I recommend all marketers to marry human creativity with technology
     learning in order to deliver value to customers. Over the past 20 years
     I have run marketing at companies large and small, on four different
     continents, targeting businesses and consumers. Above all, I was an early
     convert to the importance of customer data.
          In 1994 I took my first marketing job: a summer internship in
     Cusco, Peru. I drove around in a pickup truck to visit local farmers and
     tally how many would join a local cooperative to process fruits into mar-
     malades and liquors. For my next job, at Philips Consumer Electronics,
     I was asked to find a way to sell more electronics to girls and women.
     I mingled with teenagers at local high schools to collect data. Philips
     launched a product called KidCom, an electronic organizer for girls, and
     proto-typed TeenCom, a two-way paging device for teenagers. My boss
     on this project was Tony Fadell, who later became the father of the iPod
     and iPhone, and who went on to found NEST. In 1997, I relocated
     to Tokyo, Japan, to work for Nippon Telegraph and Telephone
     (NTT). All employees at NTT, whether in product or finance, worked
     one weekend in the company store to meet and serve customers.
     I recommend such “meet the customer” program to any company as
     no numbers can totally replace meeting customers face to face.
          In 2000, I moved to Silicon Valley and ran marketing for my first big
     data company, LogLogic—later acquired by TIBCO Software. For the
     first time I had access to lots of customer data in digital form. Log files are
     like the digital video cameras of the Internet. At LogLogic we used this
     log data to monitor security, but it also opened my eyes to the possibilities
     of using similar data to better understand and serve customers.
                   Introduction: Who Should Read This Book                  xxi

    I went on to work for several other technology companies, including
Fundly and Totango, focusing on building highly data-driven market-
ing organizations. Fundly helps non-profits use social media to raise
money. We used data to automate the process from self-service sign-up to
fundraising success. Totango offered a predictive marketing solution that
monitors customer behavior to identify both promising and struggling
customers. In both cases data and predictions helped to accelerate cus-
tomer acquisition and increase customer lifetime value, while lowering
the cost of sales.
    I met Omer in my role as CMO at Agilone, where I got to work
with thousands of marketers just like you to figure out how they can
best use customer data to delight customers. Omer and I are united in
our data-driven and customer-centric approach to marketing. Data and
humanistic experiences go hand-in-hand. Our passion for customers has
led us to this book.
    In my spare time, I love to travel with my husband and three children
and experience people, places, and cultures around the world. I play
ice hockey to blow off steam and was once a member of the Dutch
national team. I love to work with entrepreneurs and help them make
their dreams a reality.


Acknowledgments
This book was significantly enhanced by the efforts of Anne Puyt,
Barbara Von Euw, Rinat Shimshi, Dhruv Bhargava, Carrie Koy, Joe
Mancini, Angela Sanfilippo, Hac Phan, and Francis Brero, who not
only work tirelessly every day to help companies be successful with
predictive marketing, but who also went above and beyond the call of
duty to add their experiences, examples, and wisdom to the manuscript.
    We also want to thank visionary CEOs and CMOs who were
early adopters of the predictive marketing approach, specifically John
Seabreeze, VP Marketing at Billy Casper Golf; Joe McDonald, SVP
Sales and Marketing of Stargas, Eoin Comerford, CEO of Moosejaw;
Levent Cakiroglu, CEO of Arcelik; Ersin Akarlilar, CEO of Mavi;
Adam Shaffer, EVP Marketing of TigerDirect.
    Additionally, Omer’s personal success, the success of AgilOne, and
the concepts in this book would not have become a reality without the
xxii                    Introduction: Who Should Read This Book

       help from Bonnie Bartoli, Peter Godfrey, and his “adopted sons and
       daughter” Ozer Unat, Dhruv Bhargava, Oyku Akca, Anselme LeVan,
       Louis Lecat, Ryan Willette, and Francis Brero.
           We would also like to thank our families:
           Omer would also very much like to thank his wife Dr. Burcak Artun,
       always believing and encouraging him for challenging the status quo and
       being patient with his busy schedule.
           Dominique thanks her husband, Eilam, and children Liv, Yanai, and
       Milo, for their encouragement during the writing process. Similarly,
       she would like to thank her AgilOne marketing superstars, Chris Field,
       Johnson Kang, Kessawan Lelanaphaparn, and Angela Sanfilippo for being
       so independent and professional so she could focus on the book at times.
PART 1


A Complete
Predictive
Marketing Primer




                   1
CHAPTER 1



Big Data and Predictive
Analytics Are Now
Easily Accessible to All
Marketers

P   redictive marketing is the evolution of relationship marketing defined
    and practiced by many direct marketers in the last few decades.
Predictive marketing is not a technology, but an approach or a philos-
ophy. Predictive marketing uses predictive analytics as a way to deliver
more relevant and meaningful customer experiences, at all customer
touch points, throughout the customer life cycle, boosting customer
loyalty and revenues.
    The rise of predictive marketing is fueled by three factors:
(1) customers are demanding a more personal, integrated approach as
they interact with marketing and sales through many channels, (2) early
adopters show that predictive marketing delivers enormous value, and
(3) new technologies are available to capture new and existing sources of
customer data, to recognize patterns, and to make it easier than ever to
use customer data at the intersection of the physical and digital worlds.
    Predictive analytics is a set of tools and algorithms used to make
predictive marketing possible. It is an umbrella term that covers a vari-
ety of mathematical and statistical techniques to recognize patterns in

                                                                             3
4                     A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

    data or make predictions about the future. When applied to marketing,
    predictive analytics can predict future customer behavior, classify cus-
    tomers into clusters among other use cases. Other terms you might hear
    in the media to describe this process include machine learning, pattern
    recognition, artificial intelligence, and data mining. Predictive analytics and
    machine learning are used interchangeably in this book.
         Predictive marketing is fundamentally changing both business and
    consumer marketing across the customer life cycle. It is transforming the
    focus from products and channels to a focus on the customer. Predictive
    analytics is used to improve strategies to acquire new customers, to grow
    customer lifetime value, and to retain more customers over time.
         Innovative, technology driven companies like Netflix and Amazon
    have been using predictive analytics for years, and so have others like
    many in the telecommunications, financial services, and gaming indus-
    tries, such as Harrah’s Entertainment. The row of movies and TV shows
    “you might like” that appear when you curl up on the couch and turn on
    Netflix is a driving force of the company’s success. It’s all made possible
    by the translation of customer data with smart analytics. In fact, “75% of
    what people watch [on Netflix] is from some sort of recommendation,”
    Netflix’s Research Director Xavier Amatriain wrote on the company’s
    tech blog in 2012.
         Amazon has been using predictive analytics to drive success since the
    very beginning of the company. Recommendations that appear under
    a product you are thinking of adding into your cart is part of what
    makes Amazon such an e-commerce powerhouse today. The company
    has stated publicly that 35 percent of its sales comes from recommenda-
    tions made by their predictive engines. That would equate to $26 billion
    of revenue in 2013. The company is using predictive analytics in many
    other ways too, such as predicting which email newsletter to send you,
    or to nudge you at the right times to reorder an item.
         In the gaming industry predictive models can set budgets and
    calendars for the casino’s gamblers, calculating their predicted lifetime
    value in the process. If a gambler wagers less than usual because they may
    have skipped a monthly visit, the casino can intervene with a letter or
    phone call offering a free meal, a show ticket, or gaming comps. Without
    this type of customer analytics, casino operators might not notice
    what could be a slight, almost imperceptible change in customer behav-
    ior that might portend future problems with that patron. For example,
     Big Data and Predictive Analytics Are Now Easily Accessible to All Marketers   5

if a long-time customer decides to cash in all their player card points,
perhaps it’s because they are dissatisfied with their last experience at
the casino property. Predictive analytics can quickly spot these trends
and alert casino management to the issue so that they can approach the
individual to find out if there is a problem. This kind of personalization
can go a long way in appeasing a disgruntled customer, which might be
the difference between retaining or losing them as a customer.
     Harrah’s Entertainment’s Total Rewards, which was rolled out as
Total Gold in 1997 and renamed Total Rewards a year later, is heralded
by many as the gold standard of customer-relationship programs and
is powered heavily by predictive analytics algorithms. The company’s
belief in its loyalty program grew so strong that it cut its traditional ad
spending from 2008 and 2009 more than 50%. The company spent $106
million on measured media in 2008; for the first half of last year it spent
$52 million and in this year’s first half $20 million. (Source: http://adage
.com/article/news/harrah-s-loyalty-program-industry-s-gold-standard/
139424/.)
     Although some large brands have been using predictive analytics
for many years now, it is not too late for other brands, large and small.
In fact, predictive marketing is only now finding widespread adoption
in medium and small organizations. A good example of a company
that has achieved significant success with predictive marketing is Mavi,
a high-fashion clothing manufacturer and retailer based in Istanbul,
Turkey. Mavi is known for its organic denim favored by celebrities and
supermodels. Mavi operates over 350 multinational stores and sales chan-
nels in the United States, Canada, Australia, Turkey, and 10 European
countries.
     Mavi started with a single predictive marketing campaign six years
ago. When Mavi first got started, each department, including mar-
keting and IT, used its own set of marketing reports and customer
data, including key performance indicators. This led to cumbersome
cross-referencing and impeded important decision making. Like many
companies, the Mavi marketing team initially did not have access to cus-
tomer data without relying on IT resources. This was the first problem
that the team tackled. Mavi deployed a modern, cloud-based predictive
marketing solution in 2009. This allowed the company to consolidate,
cleanse, and de-dupe their customer data on a daily basis. They were
then ready to start using data in hyperpersonalized campaigns.
6                    A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

         One of the first predictive marketing programs that Mavi tested was a
    program around specific buying personas. Mavi used predictive analytics
    to find groups of people with distinct product preferences. In predictive
    lingo these are called product-based clusters. Mavi found at least three very
    different groups of shoppers: customers who favored mostly woven
    shirts, others who favored beachwear, whereas a third persona mostly
    shopped for new season high fashion and accessories. Mavi started to
    use these personas to implement more targeted marketing campaigns
    via email and short message service (SMS). Specifically, it implemented
    a reengagement campaign for lapsed customers that featured the
    right types of products with the right customers. Using these clusters,
    Mavi was able to reactivate 20 percent of lapsed customers. This was a big
    breakthrough because every customer saved or reactivated reduces Mavi’s
    need to acquire new customers.
         Mavi today is running more than 80 different predictive marketing
    programs in a year. Collectively, these campaigns helped add 7 percentage
    points to Mavi’s overall revenues in the first few years, which is a huge
    sum on a dollars and cents basis. Wikipedia reports that Mavi revenues
    in 2014 were $747 million, so that would be an incremental $52 million.
    Mavi is still finding new ways to increase customer lifetime value, and
    with every campaign launched this number is pushed up higher.
         Elif Oner, Mavi’s head of customer relationship management, rec-
    ommends all marketers get started with predictive marketing. She says:
    “Start small and pick just one program and build on that success.” Elif is
    also the CFO’s favorite marketer. Every dollar she spends in market-
    ing, every discount she gives, is accounted for, tested, and optimized.
    The CIO Bulent Dursun also played an important role in realizing the
    potential of analytics and was a key supporter, which made the approach
    successful.


    The Predictive Marketing Revolution
    Anticipating customer needs is not a new concept. What is new is the
    ability to anticipate and respond to customer needs automatically, near
    real time and at large scale, for hundreds, thousands, or even millions of
    customers at a time.
         Not too long ago, you could walk into a corner store and the salesper-
    son would know your name, know what kind of things you bought, how
      Big Data and Predictive Analytics Are Now Easily Accessible to All Marketers   7

long you’ve been a customer, and other important information about
your personality and behavior. This relationship not only makes the buy-
ing process pleasant, it also increases the likelihood of the customer to
return, spend more, and develop a sense of brand loyalty and trust.
     These days we shop in supermarkets where nobody knows our name.
The promise of predictive marketing is to bring the personal relationships
of the corner store to the modern world of online and offline marketing.
Using predictive analytics, it is possible to move from an era of mass
marketing centered on the products you sell and the promotions you
send to an era of highly personalized marketing centered on the customer
you serve.
     Today, even small- and midsize businesses interact with customers on
an enormous scale through a wide variety of channels, including web-
sites, social media, mobile apps, and store visits. Because of the substantial
increase in speed, number, and type of customer interactions, companies
have a greater opportunity to maintain the kind of personal relationships
that used to be an important aspect of doing business. Of course this is
not easy, and many companies fail due to lack of technical, organizational
capabilities and strategic focus.
     Customer interactions and the digitization of so much of our daily
activities have allowed businesses to gather an extraordinary amount
of data about their customers that can be put to use to better service
customers. For example, when you buy a pair of shoes at Zappos, the
company knows many things about you: what type of shoes you like,
your name, gender, where you live, whether your zip code is mainly
made up of apartment buildings or single-family homes, whether you
typically buy items at full price or at a discount, whether you bought just
one product or multiple products, how often you clicked on a Zappos
email or visited its website before placing that first order and what you
looked at, how often you called the call center, whether you are a
first-time or repeat customer, whether you are a VIP customer or an
unprofitable customer who returns more products than she keeps, and
much more.
     Most companies still find it very difficult to put any of this informa-
tion to good use. The sheer size and breadth of the records make them
incomprehensible for anyone without the training and experience to
mine insights from large datasets. This is where predictive analytics and
machine learning come in. Machines are very good at mining insights
8                    A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer




    Figure 1.1   The Predictive Marketing Revolution



    from large datasets automatically. Machines can remember the names of
    millions of customers with no effort and greet them accordingly, just
    as the shopkeeper from yesteryear would have done. In other words,
    using machines, humans can now bring back the personalized market-
    ing interactions from yesteryear, even if their company has millions of
    customers. Figure 1.1 illustrates how the marketing revolution has come
    full circle. In the 1800s, shopkeepers had personal relationships with
    each and every customer. In the 1900s, during the industrial revolution,
    these personal relationships fell victim to mass marketing and a desire
    to scale businesses. Now, thanks to the technological revolution, mar-
    keters can bring back the personal relationships from yesteryear, while
    still operating companies at a large scale.
          Predictive marketing is the perfect marriage between machine learn-
    ing and human intelligence. The point of predictive marketing is not to
    replace marketers with machines but rather to empower and augment
    human intelligence with machine learning.


    The Power of Customer Equity
    Predictive marketing gives rise to a new, data-driven way to approach
    marketing, with the customer at its center. The ability to collect and
    analyze data on every single customer, as well as his or her interactions
     Big Data and Predictive Analytics Are Now Easily Accessible to All Marketers   9




Figure 1.2   From a Product to a Customer Orientation

with your brand, allows you to serve your customers better and generate
more sales. At its core, as Figure 1.2 illustrates, predictive marketing is
helping companies to evolve from a product- or channel-centric orien-
tation to a customer-centric orientation. Companies using predictive
marketing focus on developing and managing customer relationships
rather than just developing and selling products or channels:

• Instead of finding customers who will want your products, it is now
  possible to discover which products your customers will want in the
  future.
• Instead of maximizing sales, companies in the customer era focus
  on optimizing customer lifetime value and share of wallet to drive
  profitability of the enterprise.
10                    A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     • Instead of organizing around channels and product lines, companies
       which practice predictive marketing organize around the customer.
     • With the customer at the center, companies are using big data and
       predictive analytics to configure processes and organizations to find
       ways to customize interactions.
     • Communications become much more targeted and the key metric is
       relevance, not reach.

         Predictive marketing allows you to identify and realize the long-term
     value of customer relations to keep your best customers coming back and
     buying more. Figure 1.3 illustrates the core principle: if your company
     acquires more profitable customers, grows the value of each and every
     customer systematically, and retains these customer relationships for a
     long time, the firm will grow, too.
         Companies should think about managing customer equity in much
     the same way they manage their stock portfolios: just like stocks,
     some customers are more valuable than others and their value will rise
     and fall throughout time. Predictive marketing gives companies an easy
     and automated way to manage individual customer lifetime value and
     customer equity.
         The key to unlocking this value lies in the information you are able
     to collect about your customers. The more you can personalize the expe-
     riences you offer, the more likely the customer remains loyal to your
     brand. Think about your hairdresser. She has a lot of information about
     you. She knows how you like your hair cut and probably knows a lot
     about your family, friends, and job. This information makes the inter-
     action with your hairdresser very seamless. You sit down, she gets to
     work, and you have a pleasant conversation. She may call you when it’s
     time for your next appointment and suggest a new hairstyle from time to
     time. It would take you a long time to start over with a new hairdresser.
     Your hairdresser has very few clients. Most marketers serve millions of
     customers. It is not possible for a brand to collect and process the data
     of millions of customers without computers and software.
         Predictive marketing puts customer data and insights directly in the
     hands of marketers, customer-facing personnel, and applications that
     deliver personalized experiences to individual customers.
    Big Data and Predictive Analytics Are Now Easily Accessible to All Marketers   11




Figure 1.3   Customers Are Key to Market Value


Predictive Marketing Use Cases
Predictive marketing is much more than just providing recommenda-
tions. The most commonly use cases of predictive marketing are the
following:

• Improve precision of targeting and acquisition efforts. With
  predictive marketing it is possible to know which channels produce
  the most profitable customers and optimize marketing spending based
12                    A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

       on this knowledge. Armed with better information about behavioral
       buying personas, marketers can also design more effective acquisi-
       tion campaigns that hypertarget a specific microsegment and increase
       conversions by four times or more.
     • Use personalized experiences to increase lifetime value.
       Predictive marketing can predict future customer preferences and
       interactions (such as a customer’s likelihood to buy). Armed with
       this information, marketers can improve personalization, relevancy,
       and timing of customer interactions. It is these experiences that will
       keep customers coming back and maximize customer lifetime value.
       If you can maximize the lifetime value of each of your customers,
       you will automatically maximize the value of your entire customer
       portfolio and thereby the value of your company as a whole.
     • Understand customer retention and loyalty. Predicting when,
       why, and which customers will return or leave is a big challenge
       for many organizations. Predictive marketing can help flag customers
       who are at risk of leaving so that marketers can take proactive steps
       to retain these customers. Predictive analytics can also generate
       insights about loyalty-inducing behaviors that maximize customer
       lifetime value.
     • Optimize customer engagement. Predicting who will respond to
       an email promotion, what would it take to convert a browser into a
       buyer, what discount is needed to incent the customer to complete
       the transaction are all methods of increasing customer engagement in
       real time or near real time that maximizes marketing effectiveness.

          Figure 1.4 gives examples of questions that predictive analytics can
     answer for marketers. These examples, as well as other used cases, are
     discussed in greater detail throughout the book. The list below is not an
     all-inclusive list, as the marketing questions that can be answered with
     predictive analytics are really endless.
          Armed with information ranging from likelihood to buy, predicted
     lifetime value, and future product preferences, brands can better
     serve their prospects and their customers by delivering personalized
     experiences.
      Big Data and Predictive Analytics Are Now Easily Accessible to All Marketers             13

10 Questions to Answer              How Predictive Can Help
 1. Who my best customers           Predict which prospects or customers have the highest
    will be                            lifetime value, taking into account revenues, but
                                       also the cost to acquire and service these accounts.
                                       Use this information to spend time and money on
                                       high-potential customers early on.
 2. Find more new customers         Predict which prospects are most like your existing
    like your existing best            high-value customers using look-alike targeting
    customers                          (B2C) or specialized lead generation vendors
                                       (B2B).
 3. Find personas in your data to   Predict the customer clusters that most distinguish
    use to acquire more                buying personas with respect to brands, products,
    customers like this                content and behaviors in your customer base.
                                       Then develop creative, content, products, and
                                       services to attract more buyers like this.
 4. Which marketing channels        Predict which channels attract the customers with the
    are most profitable                highest lifetime value, including all future
                                       purchases. Use this information to influence
                                       keyword bidding strategies and channel
                                       investments.
 5. Which prospects (nonbuyers)     Determine who is most likely to buy so you can give
    are most likely to buy             the right incentive (in B2C) or prioritize your sales
                                       personnel’s time with the right prospects (in B2B).
 6. Which existing (or past)        Product incentive (or discount) is needed to convince
    customers are most likely          a one-time buyer to become a repeat customer.
    to buy                             Prioritize the time of account managers to focus
                                       on likely upsell candidates.
 7. Which existing customers        Predict which customers are likely to leave and target
    are least likely to buy            them proactively with a “please come back”
                                       incentive, a personalized recommendation or by
                                       having the customer success manager make a call.
 8. What customers might be         Predict which customers might be interested in
    interested in a specific new       overstock items or a new product release so you
    product                            can focus your sales and marketing efforts on these
                                       businesses or consumers.
 9. What other products or          Predict what product or content recommendations to
    content might this customer        make to a particular customer in order to win,
    be interested in                   upsell, or reengage this customer.
10. What is my share of wallet      Predict in what markets or customer groups you have
    with a specific customer           high value potential to focus future customer
                                       acquisition strategies.

Figure 1.4     Ten Examples of Predictive Marketing
14                    A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     Predictive Marketing Adoption Is Accelerating
     A recent survey of 132 marketing executives by our company AgilOne
     found that 76 percent of marketers used some form of predictive
     analytics in their marketing in 2015, which is up from 69 percent in
     2014. The acceleration is fueled by three factors: (1) customers are
     demanding the benefits of predictive marketing—mainly highly relevant
     and timely marketing, (2) early adopters show that predictive marketing
     delivers enormous value, and (3) new technologies are available to make
     predictive marketing easy.

     Customers Are Demanding More Meaningful
     Relationships with Brands
     Consumers are bombarded with marketing and frankly are fed up.
     Retail research agency Conlumino conducted a consumer survey in late
     2014 that showed many consumers have come to expect some form of
     personalization—in part because the larger and more established brands
     have been serving up personalized experiences for some years now.
     By asking more than 3,000 adult online shoppers about what informa-
     tion they expected companies to know about them and what personal-
     ized experiences they appreciate, the survey uncovered that more than
     70 percent of shoppers want brands to deliver some type of personalized
     experience, whether it is sending an alert about a new product that
     matches their interests, a refill reminder, or VIP customer recognition.
     Certain types of customized experiences, such as loyalty rewards and
     personalized discounts, were popular across the board, whereas appreci-
     ation levels for other areas of personalization differed greatly depending
     on age, location, gender, and a number of other factors. The findings
     suggest that it is crucial to have a deep understanding of your customers,
     and using hypertargeting is crucial to building brand loyalty:

     • More than 79 percent of U.S. consumers and 70 percent of U.K.
       consumers expect some sort of personalization from brands.
     • More than half of consumers in the United States and United
       Kingdom expect e-commerce sites to remember their past purchases.
     • Among U.S. shoppers, the most popular personalized experiences
       were emails offering discounts on products they previously viewed
     Big Data and Predictive Analytics Are Now Easily Accessible to All Marketers   15

  (66 percent), alerts when products they like are on sale (57 percent),
  and VIP customer appreciation rewards (51 percent).
• Consumers in the United States were much more likely to expect
  online retailers to personalize experiences than those in the United
  Kingdom: about half of Americans want to receive a new customer
  welcome greeting, versus only 34 percent in the United Kingdom.
• Shoppers age 18 to 34, part of the “millennial” generation, were more
  likely to appreciate almost all forms personalization: 52 percent of
  millennials expect brands to remember their birthday as compared to
  21 percent of those aged 65-plus.
• Personalization of email is much more popular than personalization of
  display advertising, with 66 percent of U.S. consumers and 57 percent
  of U.K. consumers welcoming email-retargeting, but only 24 percent
  (U.S.) and 17 percent (U.K.) welcoming web-based retargeting.

     In one case, the customers of a high-fashion brand from New York
actually wrote to tell the company they felt they were not receiving the
personalized experience they deserved. Specifically, this company was
conducting postpurchase surveys after each shipment. Some customers
wrote that they were frequent shoppers of the brand, yet felt they did
not receive any special treatment. It is rare for customers to express their
dissatisfaction with one-size-fits-all marketing so directly. It is more likely
that customers are letting you know through their actions. Are you expe-
riencing an unusually large number of customer complaints, do you have
a small number of repeat buyers, or are you seeing a large number of
opt outs from your email campaigns? All of these could be signs that
customers are not getting the personal attention they expect.
     Another example comes from a small kitchenware company. For
years, its products were offered in limited quantities and geographic areas.
Word spread about the unique products, and to meet customer demand,
the products are now offered through its website directly to consumers
and in large retail outlets such as Costco. The passionate customer base
was demanding more relevant communications. Customers did not write
or call to tell the company about this, but rather it started to experience
a rising number of opt outs when sending email. Clearly customers were
saying that the one-size-fits-all email campaigns were not suiting their
needs. Today customers receive much more relevant and timely email,
16                    A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     such as replenishment reminders to reorder barbecue pellets for grilling
     just around the time they were running out of their last order. Predictive
     marketing has increased the purchase rate from their marketing emails
     from 1 percent to 4 percent, while reducing the unsubscribe rate by 40
     percent within just six weeks.
          Many marketers may think they are delivering relevant experiences,
     but consumer perception is often very different. A 2013 AgilOne survey
     of 2,000 marketers and consumers, found that 75 percent of marketers
     believe that they are sending as many as 15 relevant marketing campaigns
     to consumers each year. However, 34 percent of consumers say they
     cannot remember a single relevant campaign from the past year. Clearly
     there is a disconnect between marketers and consumers. The same survey
     found that 52 percent of marketers send the exact same email to all of
     their customers and 65 percent send the exact same number of emails to
     each of their customers regardless of their preferences.
          Marketers need to change their thinking dramatically. Today, mar-
     keters may cheer when one of their email campaigns receives a 4 percent
     click-through rate. In reality that means that 96 percent of customers
     deemed this email irrelevant. That is a terrible result. We believe all
     customers deserve to be served relevant and respectful communications.
     Instead of sending 100 messages with a relevancy of 1 percent, marketers
     should start sending a single message with a relevancy of 100 percent.

     Early Adopters Show That Predictive Marketing
     Delivers Enormous Value
     Marketers better pay attention to predictive analytics. Applying predic-
     tive analytics is the biggest game-changing opportunity since the Inter-
     net went mainstream almost 20 years ago, because of the unprecedented
     array of insights into customer needs and behaviors it makes possible.
     When Bill Gates was asked during a 2013 Sequoia Capital event what
     company he would start if he were starting out today, he answered with
     two words: machine learning.
          In his book, Data Driven Marketing, Kellogg School of Management
     faculty Mark Jeffrey proves that high-performing companies spend sig-
     nificantly more on data infrastructure than lower performers (16 percent
     versus 10 percent). High performers were defined as the top 25 percent
     of the dataset, measured by their excellence at marketing a basket of
     Big Data and Predictive Analytics Are Now Easily Accessible to All Marketers   17

financial metrics, which validated the high performers indeed get better
financial performance. High performers also spend more on customer
equity or retention marketing (14 percent versus 11 percent) and less
on demand generation (48 percent versus 58 percent). He also describes
the success of early adopters of predictive analytics in this book.
For example, Earthlink used predictive analytics to identify dissatisfied
customers about to churn. Taking proactive steps to contact and retain
these customers helped Earthlink reduce churn by 30 percent. Similarly,
the supermarket chain Sainsbury Stores used predictive analytics to
cluster its customer base in relevant segments. The company then used
these segments to remodel its stores and customize the product assort-
ment in each store based on these data. As a result, revenues increased
by 12 percent.
    There is no limit in the number of campaigns that a company
can develop. Mavi, the mid-market retailer we discussed earlier, has
developed over sixty individual campaigns, using predictive analytics,
gradually increasing revenues and profitability.

New Technologies Are Available to Make
Predictive Marketing Easy
So why are all marketers’ not using predictive marketing techniques
already? Until recently the technology needed to collect, analyze, and
act on large amounts of customer data for hundreds, thousands, or
millions of customers was inaccessible to most marketers. It was too
expensive, time-consuming, and cumbersome to invest in the technol-
ogy and manpower required to collect and analyze customer data and
to deliver customer experiences across channels based on these insights.
However, recently predictive analytics has matured to the point that out
of the box, standard algorithms and technologies are available, which
marketers can access without the help of data scientists or software
engineers. In Chapter 15 we discuss in detail the different off-the-shelf
tools available to marketers today, which make it significantly cheaper,
faster, and easier to use predictive marketing.

Predictive Marketing Is Becoming More Affordable The costs
involved with predictive marketing can include the money spent on
hardware and software technology, as well as the people time spent on
18                    A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     data collection, integration, predictive analytics model development
     and deployment, and the people time needed—from marketers or data
     scientists—for the ongoing maintenance of these models and the use of
     these models in daily marketing campaigns.
          Until recently, the data-warehousing infrastructure alone to collect
     and store customer data could cost you hundreds of thousands or even
     millions of dollars. In his book about data-driven marketing, Mark
     Jeffrey documents that a small regional retailer with 10 stores, 100,000
     customers, and 1 terabyte of customer data may need to spend $50,000 to
     $250,000 to build in-house data warehousing infrastructure. That num-
     ber rises to $2.5 million for a medium-size retail chain with 400 stores
     and to $250 million for a large, national retailer with 5,000 stores.
     Nowadays, cloud-based predictive marketing solutions are available for
     as little as several thousand dollars a month.

     Predictive Marketing Is Becoming Easier to Deploy Whichever
     solution you use—an off-the-shelf package or an in-house solution—
     you will need to collect and integrate customer data into a customer
     profile for each customer. In a late 2014 survey of 132 marketing exec-
     utives, AgilOne found that 68 percent of marketers do not have a single
     view of each customer. You probably have a lot of information about
     your customers already, but this data may reside in many different silos.
     Most companies have separate databases for online transactions, store
     transactions, and phone transactions. Web behavior has its own silo as
     does email behavior, social behavior, and service center interactions.
     Until recently, it could take months or years to accomplish the data
     integration needed to build a single customer profile and to link and
     deduplicate all customer data. Recently, more automated solutions have
     emerged that make data integration and data cleansing much easier.
     These solutions often use standard data models that make it easier and
     faster to standardize customer data across channels.
          Historically you did not just need in-house infrastructure; you also
     needed in-house or outsourced data integration specialists and data
     scientists. Data scientists were needed to build custom models to analyze
     customer data—probably using a predictive analytics workbench tool.
     These models also needed to be tweaked and tuned periodically to
     continue to deliver accurate results. Data scientists are in short supply,
     and more than 50 new graduate programs have sprung up across
     Big Data and Predictive Analytics Are Now Easily Accessible to All Marketers   19

the United States alone to fill the gap. Fortunately, nowadays many
marketing solutions come with out-of-the-box, built-in models that
are proven and tested by other companies in your industry. Some of
these models even have self-learning capabilities, which means that they
adjust to your evolving customer data automatically over time without
requiring ongoing maintenance from a data scientist.

Predictive Marketing Is Becoming More Accessible to Marketers
Even if customer data is available within the organization, it may not be
available to you, the marketer. This happened to Omer Artun, when he
joined Best Buy as the head of marketing for a new division called “Best
Buy for Business” in December 2003:

    I joined Best Buy from Micro Warehouse where I had already built a
    near real-time customer analytics system to track and analyze orders
    on a daily basis. I was hired to do the same for Best Buy’s new B2B
    group, which sold products such as routers, printers and computers
    to small businesses. Best Buy, like many companies, was outsourcing
    its IT to a third party at the time. If you wanted to talk customer
    data with this group, it was $10,000 dollars just to meet. I went to
    the IT guys and asked for a raw data dump, nothing else, but got
    nothing. After a couple of months, I still wasn’t able to obtain a list
    of customers who had purchased from us in the past. The data was
    available somewhere, but not accessible to me. I fought the battle for
    another nine months before I finally gave up. I started a company,
    AgilOne, to make predictive analytics and customer data accessible
    to marketers shortly thereafter.

    Even having access to data will not drive revenue unless data can be
used to deliver more relevant experiences to customers. It can be diffi-
cult to integrate and share customer information directly with customer-
facing personnel or applications that send out or trigger these types of
customer communications. It is not unusual for a company to have a
lot of customer data, but for marketers to be unable to use this infor-
mation to segment customers within their email marketing software, for
example, without complicated, time-consuming, and costly data inte-
gration. A new generation of marketing software is becoming available,
where predictive insights are accessible as drag-and-drop filters to help
20                     A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     segment and target customers and to include personalized content or
     recommendations as dynamic content in emails or advertisements.


     What Do You Need for Predictive Marketing?
     The fundamental building blocks of a successful predictive marketing
     initiative, as summarized in Figure 1.5, are:

     1. Continuously learn more and more about your customers: capture
        data, build profiles and unify the information on a daily basis.
        We discuss how to do this in great detail in Chapter 3.
     2. Analyze customer information and assess customer preferences and
        profitability at a micro (individual/segment) and macro level—both
        past and future. Chapter 2 gives you an overview of the different
        predictive algorithms you can use as a marketer.
     3. Leverage customer information to profitably personalize experiences
        across all customer touch points, and to optimize the return on invest-
        ment of your marketing and sales time and money. Part II of this book
        is entirely devoted to these practical applications.

         In order to do predictive marketing, you need to develop these
     three capabilities of collecting and integrating customer data, analyzing
     customer data, and delivering relevant customer experiences across
     channels. You can acquire these capabilities in one of three ways: (1) build
     predictive models yourself using a predictive analytics workbench,




     Figure 1.5   The Predictive Marketing Process
     Big Data and Predictive Analytics Are Now Easily Accessible to All Marketers   21

(2) outsource customer analytics and predictive marketing campaigns to
a marketing service provider, or (3) evaluate and buy a predictive mar-
keting solution, such as a predictive marketing cloud or a multichannel
campaign management tool. The first option will cost you millions of
dollars and require you to hire an in-house team. Marketing service
providers are typically servicing the Fortune 500, and annual contracts
for full customer data integration, analysis, and personalized campaign
probably start at a quarter million dollars a year. Predictive marketing
cloud solutions available at the time that we are writing this book start
at about $50,000 a year. Chapter 15 provides more details about each
of these options as well as some criteria to decide which route is best
for you.
    Whatever you do after reading this book, we recommend that
you get started with predictive marketing in some way or another.
Early adopters of predictive marketing will have significant competitive
advantages, including more loyal and valuable customers. Companies
that fail to adopt predictive marketing are at risk of falling behind.
The key is to start small and grow your efforts over time. Find a quick
win that can deliver immediate ROI.
CHAPTER 2



An Easy Primer to
Predictive Analytics
for Marketers

A    natural nutrition company has been in business for 60 years. While it
     is an $800 million business, the marketing team is small and the com-
pany does not have an in-house data science team nor have the systems
to leverage the data it collected over the years about its customers, many
of which were very loyal. The company is using cloud-based predictive
marketing software to organize, understand, and utilize its customer data
with significant results.
     The software discovered customers that make their first purchase
without any free membership promotions spend 76.5 percent more than
customers who join with a free membership offer. It also found that
customers who placed auto ship orders were likely to spend three times
more over their lifetime. The company was then able to develop smart
campaigns around membership programs to encourage customers to sign
up and enroll in auto ship when possible.
     The software also sorted its customer base into clusters, or groups
of customers with similar interests. In doing this, it found a weight-loss
cluster that was underserved and sent additional personalized communi-
cations, resulting in a 300 percent increase in revenue. It became clear



                                                                             23
24                    A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     that customers tend to make the majority of purchases within specific
     nutritional categories and rarely migrate across categories, prompting
     an initiative to focus communications to each cluster around the most
     complimentary products for each cluster.
         Lastly, the software came with a number of quick-win campaigns,
     triggered by specific customer behaviors such as abandoned cart
     and replenishment programs, which resulted in 28 percent incremental
     web conversions and 22 percent new orders from email reminders,
     respectively.
         The nutrition business story illustrates how everyday marketers can
     now use predictive marketing methods without ever hiring a single
     data scientist. The company owns its own customer data, but relies on
     cloud-based software for predictive algorithms, advanced segmentation,
     and life cycle campaign templates. Even if they don’t have in-house data
     scientists or develop algorithms in-house, many marketers are curious
     about what is happening “under the hood” of such predictive marketing
     software. This chapter is written for those marketers.
         This chapter aims to give an easy primer on predictive analytics so
     you will understand how predictive marketing software works. Think
     about it this way: in order to use a word processor, you don’t need to
     learn to program a computer. However, in the early days of personal
     computers, people took basic programming classes anyway before using
     a word processor “just in case.” Similarly, this chapter is aiming to
     teach you the basics of predictive analytics algorithms. It will hopefully
     give you more confidence using its outputs. You can safely ignore this
     chapter and jump to Part Two of this book. Knowledge about predictive
     analytics is not necessary in order to practice predictive marketing.


     What Is Predictive Analytics?
     Predictive models are used in many areas of business and everyday life
     including politics, fraud detection, or risk modeling, such as when cal-
     culating your credit score. For the purpose of marketing, we are looking
     to use advanced math in order to predict individual customer behavior
     and to group customers into the most actionable and meaningful ways.
     For example, using predictive analytics, you can predict whether and
     when a customer may be planning to buy next. You might also be able
     to detect distinct groups of buyers in your customer data, such as cus-
     tomers who only ever buy on discount—so-called discount junkies—or
                An Easy Primer to Predictive Analytics for Marketers            25

customers who buy a lot but return most items they buy—the returna-
holics. Last, using predictive analytics you could predict what specific
product a customer may buy next and recommend these products to
your customers proactively.
    There are three types of predictive analytics that marketers should
know about:

1. Unsupervised learning (such as clustering models): Unsupervised learning
   finds hidden patterns in data, without explicitly trying to estimate or
   predict an outcome. For example, finding similar customers within a
   large group of customers, such as those who like long-distance run-
   ning versus skiing, without explicitly knowing what groups exist or
   who belongs to them. Unsupervised algorithms such as clustering
   are thus typically used to unveil the true underlying segmentation of
   your data.
2. Supervised learning (such as propensity models or predictions): Supervised
   learning is used to estimate an output given an input, by training it
   with sample inputs and target. An example is to estimate the lifetime
   value of a customer, the likelihood a customer will engage with your
   brand, or a specific product a customer might want to buy next.
3. Reinforcement learning (more commonly used for recommendations): Rein-
   forcement learning allows us to leverage hidden patterns and similar-
   ities in the data to accurately predict the best next steps, outcomes,
   products, or content for the user or a given event. Unlike super-
   vised learning, reinforcement learning algorithms are not provided a
   training input/output sample but learn from a trial-and-error-based
   learning scheme.


Unsupervised Learning: Clustering Models
Unsupervised learning is about recognizing patterns in the data without
knowing ahead of time what you are looking for or using explicit labels.
One of the approaches is called clustering. For example, looking at the
buying behavior of customers, there could be a cluster of people who
usually buy only when they are being given a discount. This group of
customers could be detected without imposing any specific pattern or
hypothesis or knowledge of the data ahead of time, but rather the pattern
of this group would emerge by trying to group customers who are most
“behaviorally similar” together.
26                     A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     The difference between clustering and segmentation
     If segmentation is the process of manually putting customers into groups
     based on similarities, then clustering is the automated/statistically rig-
     orous process of finding similarities in customers so that they can be
     grouped. When you segment you know whom to target ahead of time;
     when you cluster you discover whom to target. Clustering is a method to
     automatically discover segments in your customer base by using already
     known factors about your customers. Clustering algorithms, such as
     k-means and apriori algorithms, can analyze hundreds of customer
     attributes and previous customer interactions to reveal insights into cus-
     tomer behaviors and the forces driving those behaviors. This is different
     from customer segmentation in the sense that most segmentation utilizes
     one or two factors, such as age or income in non-statistical ways to group
     customers together. Also, as Swedish statistician Hans Rosling put it,
     “the problem is not ignorance, it is pre-conceived ideas.”
          For example, if I am selling an expensive cocktail dress, I want to
     market to people who are most likely to buy the dress. So first I define the
     limits of the target group: women with annual incomes over $100,000.
     Identifying and grouping customers who are women and have a high
     income is the process of segmentation. I make an assumption that people
     outside this segment most likely would not want a $1,000 dress. I may
     not have information about household income but can probably estimate
     income by looking at a customers’ zip code.
          Clustering will help you discover which women might be most likely
     to buy your new cocktail dress. Clustering algorithms look at many
     more dimensions than just zip code. After looking at many variables,
     such as age, location, time of purchase, similar items purchases, and so
     forth, a clustering algorithm automatically groups customers with similar
     behavior. For example, you might discover that it is women of a certain
     age who buy in the first two months of the year, who are the most likely
     to buy a high-end dresses (including a cocktail dress) and that household
     income has very little or nothing to do with it. It is this automatic dis-
     covery of customer attributes that matter, and the grouping of customers
     with similar attributes that we call clustering. Figure 2.1 demonstrates
     the principle of clustering visually.
          In this example we only looked at three dimensions—income, age,
     and time of purchase. In real life, the power of algorithms is that hundreds
                An Easy Primer to Predictive Analytics for Marketers             27




Figure 2.1   The Principle of Clustering


of customer attributes can be analyzed automatically, until the algorithms
find the attributes that are significant in teasing apart distinct groups
within the customer base. Marketers now have hundreds of characteris-
tics they can look at, such as brand preference, discount preference, time
spent onsite, browsing behavior, length of call. It is just not feasible for a
person to go through hundreds of types of data to find the relationships
between each variable, but for today’s powerful computers and software
algorithms this is a piece of cake.
     Usually about 8 to 15 attributes together describe a customer cluster.
You could consider this an automatically discovered persona, who you
can now start to market to. You might find that you have a statistically
significant group of customers, all young women, who buy every year
like clockwork in February, and will only buy designer dresses that are
on sale at that time—over the Internet. There might be another group
of women who are older, who only buy from you in the store, always
at full price, about every two months or so—but don’t ever go for the
cocktail dresses, only for the casual wear. You get the picture.
     Traditional methods often rely on human intuition and guesswork.
Clustering, on the other hand, uses what’s called machine-learning algo-
rithms to create customer segments. This allows computers to quickly
study massive amounts of past examples and then learn from the
28                      A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     previously collected data to distinguish one customer group from
     another, find correlations a person might not have looked for, and lead
     to surprising results that marketers might not have discovered.
          For example, let’s say you are an online retailer of fast fashion. It is dif-
     ficult to make specific product recommendations because your inventory
     changes so quickly. You can, however, cluster your customers around
     product types in order to discover distinct buying personas. Perhaps you
     will discover that certain types of products are often bought together, and
     that some customers are one-category buyers, whereas others tend to
     shop across categories. Specifically, you might discover that some people
     who buy active wear also tend to buy sunglasses, whereas another cluster
     of customers buy sunglasses together with beachwear. Using other cus-
     tomer attributes, such as location, gender, and time of purchase, you can
     distinguish these two clusters and market to them accordingly. One clus-
     ter might constitute women getting ready for vacation, whereas the
     other consists of avid runners—both men and women. Both segments
     are best addressed using different creative and content marketing strate-
     gies, but if you just look at the purchase of sunglasses you might miss
     the nuances.
          We will learn how to use clusters in marketing campaigns in
     Chapter 6.


     Supervised Learning: Propensity Models
     Propensity models, also called likelihood models, are what most people
     think of when they hear the term predictive analytics. In mathemati-
     cal terms, these models use algorithms such as neural networks, logistic
     regression, random forest, and regression trees. The names of these algo-
     rithms are of little importance to marketers. What is important to know
     is that propensity models make true predictions about a customer’s future
     behavior by learning from examples from the past. Examples include the
     likelihood of a customer to buy a product or the likelihood of a prospect
     to engage with a website.
          Propensity models are used heavily in direct mail and are often
     referred to as response models, because these models predict a customer’s
     response, for instance to buy or not to buy, as a result of receiving a piece
     of direct mail. Propensity models are guided-learning models, which
     means that it takes some time to train the data and that the models
                An Easy Primer to Predictive Analytics for Marketers             29

get better over time. As the model observes the actual outcome of the
prediction, such as did the customer buy or not, then the model can
adjust its algorithm and become more accurate over time. Therefore,
most propensity models require a short training period and a testing
period before you rely on the predictions entirely. You can accelerate
the training period by providing a historical data set as a training data set.
    Figure 2.2 demonstrates how you need either a training and test-
ing period or historical data to start making your first prediction using
propensity models.

How to Use Propensity Deciles
A key term when it comes to propensity models is deciles. Instead of
using individual customer scores, most practitioners group customers
into deciles, top 10 percent, next 10 percent, and all the way to the
bottom 10 percent.
     For instance, to predict how much money a customer would spend
throughout her lifetime, we would use what’s called a predicted lifetime
value model. The top 10 percent of customers here might have an average
predicted lifetime value of $1,000, whereas the average predicted lifetime
value for the bottom 10 percent is only $5.
     The decile approach is useful in two ways. First of all, it provides the
average value for the expected behavior such as lifetime value or spend.
Secondly, it essentially provides a rank order of your customers from the
most valuable to the least valuable, or from the most likely to buy to the
least likely to buy, in 10 equal buckets. You could use this information
in many ways, such as to decide to whom to send an expensive catalog




Figure 2.2   Training Propensity Models
30                     A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     or to design a/b lift tests. Catalogs would only go out to the customers
     in the top one or two deciles or you can test what the lift is in send-
     ing catalogs to each decile, and determine the efficacy and effectiveness.
     Or you could use this model to decide who to invite to the upcoming
     fashion show of your new sneaker line. It is more advantageous to have
     customers there who will actually buy something after the show.
          Similarly you could decide on different strategies for something as
     simple as an abandoned browse campaign: prospects who visited your
     website but didn’t convert are an important missed opportunity and
     many retargeting solutions are available to follow these non-buyers across
     the web. What if you could differentiate the offer you are making to these
     customers based on their likelihood to buy? For people with a very high
     likelihood to buy, a simple reminder might be enough to get them to
     open their wallets, whereas for people with a very low likelihood to buy
     you might offer them a discount or free shipping.
          Figure 2.3 shows you the predicted customer response to a direct
     mail campaign. This model is essentially predicting that the top 10 per-
     cent of customers, or the first decile, will make up 52 percent of all
     responses to the direct mailer. Based on this you might decide only to
     send this catalog to this top decile. If you are aiming for a certain number
     of responses, say 70 percent, you may need to send this to the top two
     deciles or you might consider sending to decile two and three because




     Figure 2.3   An Example of a Direct Mail Response Model
                An Easy Primer to Predictive Analytics for Marketers           31

decile one is likely to buy anyway, were as deciles two and three might
need the catalogue to incent them to make a purchase. Or if you have
a limited number of catalogs, or a limited budget, you can now aim
those catalogs at the customers most likely to respond. The other way
to use the model is to create a/b tests within each decile to measure the
lift to see which decile can justify the cost of incremental catalogs with
incremental profits.
      This type of model can be used to predict future prospect or cus-
tomer behavior. For example, from the moment I buy my first Gucci
handbag, the luxury manufacturer can predict with a high degree of
accuracy how many more handbags I will buy in the future. I may have
no intent to ever buy from Gucci again, but the brand knows better.
Ironically, by comparing my purchases, website visits, and email clicks,
as well as my age, sex, and location, to the behavior and demograph-
ics of thousands of other customers who have come before me, Gucci’s
algorithms can predict my future purchases better than I can myself.


Comparing Propensity Models and RFM Modeling
Before predictive analytics became widely available, the industry standard
for identifying who is likely to buy from you was a model called RFM
(Recency, Frequency, Monetary Value). However, it has limited utility
and can be surprisingly hard to use in real life. Furthermore, even though
RFM is often classified as a predictive model, it is nothing but a mere
heuristic (using a rule of thumb, an educated guess) approach with no
statistical nor predictive foundation.
     The idea is that if a customer purchased from you recently, frequently,
or has spent a lot of money with you, he or she is likely to buy from you
again. There is certainly no argument that “how many days has it been
since the customer last bought from us?” (recency), “how many times
has a customer bought from us?” (frequency), and “how much revenue
has the customer generated for us?” (monetary value) are all excellent
variables to try and predict whether the customer will return to make
another purchase.
     However, this technique has limitations. For one, it severely restricts
how companies use their own data. There are so many other variables
that can be derived from data that can serve as additional excellent pre-
dictors. Also, the old saying, “past results are no guarantee for future
32                     A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     performance,” holds true for RFM modeling as well. RFM is exclusively
     looking backward, rather than comparing customers’ current behavior
     to the future behavior of others who came before them. Using RFM
     you will not be able to recognize high-value customers before they have
     bought from you. You might also ignore past high-value customers who
     have defected to the competition.
          Let’s look at an example: there might be a pattern where customers
     buy a couple of times and then disappear. The only way to find this out
     is by comparing customer behavior to other customers just like them
     to make predictions about future behavior. If most customers buy three
     times and then disappear, then the likelihood of a customer to buy after
     three times is actually very low, whereas the RFM model would put
     this customer in a “highly likely to buy” segment. Thus, good, respon-
     sive customers might end up in not so valuable segments and thus get
     ignored for promotional mailings. The opposite might happen as well—
     not-so-great customers might end up in valuable segments. A response
     model that ranks customers by their value as opposed to the value of
     their segment can take care of this problem.
          Also, RFM models can only make predictions about the likelihood
     to buy in an environment where there are frequent purchases, such as
     retail. RFM models do nothing to predict a customer’s lifetime value,
     a customer’s likelihood to unsubscribe from a service, such as a sub-
     scription service or your email list, or the likelihood of a web browser
     (nonbuyer) to convert into a first-time buyer. Supervised learning mod-
     els can be used to make predictions about all of these customer behaviors
     and more. In many comparison tests, where the top 50 percent of cus-
     tomers are selected with RFM and propensity models, propensity models
     are on average 40% more accurate than RFM. This in many cases trans-
     lates to 20–25% less promotional costs.
          Ironically, propensity models are not only more accurate, they are
     also much easier to use for the everyday marketer. Rather than having
     to choose which combination of potentially hundreds of possible com-
     binations of recency, frequency, and monetary value to use for a
     campaign, you can just decide which of the ten propensity deciles to
     include. With predictive analytics, marketers are presented with a list that
     automatically ranks customer from the most likely to buy to the customer
     least likely to buy.
          We come back to some specific supervised learning models and how
     you can use them in Chapters 7 and 8.
                An Easy Primer to Predictive Analytics for Marketers            33

Reinforcement Learning and
Collaborative Filtering
Reinforcement learning is typically used in combination with collab-
orative filtering models. The common marketing application for col-
laborative filtering models is recommendations. From a technical point of
view, recommendation models make use of the latest machine-learning
theories in the field of collaborative filtering, bayesian networks, and fre-
quent item sets. Time-decay functions are used to take into account the
fact that recent behavior has more predictive weight than older behavior.
Finally, reinforcement learning is applied to “educate” the model to the
customer’s preferences. Again, we just mention these names in case you
want to dig deeper.
     Collaborative filtering models can recommend products, content,
or just about anything else. These recommendation models were made
famous by Amazon with their “customers who liked this product, also
liked …” suggestions. Recommendation models are a fantastic way to
grow the value and retain your customers, by suggesting relevant prod-
ucts or content they will be interested in. Suggesting relevant prod-
ucts will drive revenue directly, whereas suggesting relevant content will
increase the engagement with your brand, and indirectly create more
happy and loyal customers.
     It is important to serve up recommendations that fit the context
of where they are presented to customers. Bad or out-of-context re-
commendations will be viewed as “creepy,” “intrusive,” or “irrelevant.”
Recommendations should come at the right time: for example, just as
you are about to check out your online shopping cart it makes sense
to receive a “customers who bought this, also added …” type of recom-
mendation. Perhaps two days after, it is appropriate to receive a thank you
email suggesting useful follow-on purchases. Those who bought a wood
grill might now be recommended a cookbook or refill wood chips. It is
best also to expose this context to the consumer. The more transparent
you are, the more consumers will accept and act on your recommen-
dations. Companies that successfully utilize recommendations are now
starting to offer explanations of their recommendations to remove the
intrusive nature. You will see Amazon use words such as “because you
looked at this product, you might also be interested in these products,”
or “people who bought this product, bought it together with this other
product.” These brands are also starting to give consumers control over
34                     A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     which products are recommended. You can go to a preference center and
     exclude certain items from being considered for the recommendation
     algorithms.
          If you have worked with recommendations before you know that
     there are many details that matter when it comes to recommendation
     algorithms. First, to stay relevant, the recommendations are ideally
     refreshed in real time, and the underlying models are refreshed daily for
     each customer to take into account a customer’s recent behavior but
     also the change in behavior of other similar people.
          Also, you want to make sure that the model does not recommend
     products that are out of stock or products that have a high return rate
     or bad reviews. Some retailers do not recommend items that are on sale
     but opt for higher margin items. A good recommendation model also
     allows for marketers to manually enter merchandising rules that tweak
     the algorithm.


     Different Types of Recommendation Models
     There are three good use cases for recommendation models: upsell
     recommendations, next sell recommendations, and cross-sell recom-
     mendations. Each of these has a different place in a marketer’s arsenal.
     Also, recommendations can be made for “products that are generally
     bought together” or can be made specifically to a person based on past
     behavior. Let’s start by explaining the difference between those two.

     Products Generally Bought Together Products that are typically
     bought together are not customer-specific. At our company, we some-
     times call these product-to-product recommendations, though this is not a
     common industry term. These are the type of recommendations that are
     displayed on a product page, and will recommend other relevant prod-
     ucts to all visitors of that product page. Products that are typically bought
     together are called product-to-product recommendations. They answer
     the question: “Customers who bought this product, typically also
     bought what other products?” In this scenario, two people browsing
     the same product will receive the same recommendations. In Figure 2.4
     two people browsing the first bikini set will receive a recommendation
     for another bikini, a swim cover-up, and a tote bag. These types of
     general recommendations are especially relevant when you don’t know
               An Easy Primer to Predictive Analytics for Marketers           35




Figure 2.4   Products Typically Bought Together

much about a specific customer, such as an anonymous first-time
browser coming to your website.

User Specific Recommendations If you have more information
about a specific user, then you can go further than generic recommen-
dations. Let’s say you know the person looking at this bikini set is a
male and this is the first time that he is looking at swimwear. Normally
he browses and purchases electronics from your website. While he is
browsing, presumably for a gift or something, it might be appropriate to
recommend other bikini tops. However, when sending the customer a
thank you email two days after his purchase with recommendations of
what to buy next, you would be better off making recommendations
specific to this person that take into account the entire history, not just
the most recent browsing session.
    These are product recommendations specific to a given customer.
In our company we sometimes call these types of recommendations
product-to-user type recommendations. You can replace “product” with
“content” or “person” or whatever you are trying to recommend. In this
case, two users looking at the same product at your site would receive
totally different recommendations.
    User-specific recommendations are not limited to physical goods.
You can replace the word “product” with “content” or “event.”
36                     A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     For example, Shazam is recording the music tastes of consumers
     when you tag (Shazam) songs you like. Based on your personal tastes
     Shazam will recommend concerts that are of interest to you, but only
     if the concerts actually take place in your geographical area. For these
     recommendations to be successful, Shazam needs to know not only the
     tastes of its customers but also their physical locations.


     The Predictive Analytics Process
     Let’s walk through the different steps a data scientist, or analytics soft-
     ware, goes through to make accurate predictions or recommendations.
     Most of what we describe here happens under the hood and marketers
     don’t need to worry about any of this. Figure 2.5 gives an overview
     about what is happening under the hood, either of out-of-the-box
     predictive analytics software, or the steps your internal data scientists
     will have to go through if you are building your own predictive analytics
     models. We don’t mean to scare you by being very specific about some
     of these steps in this chapter. However, we do want you to realize
     that the do-it-yourself route to predictive marketing requires highly
     trained data scientists. There is a lot that comes with developing and
     deploying predictive algorithms for marketing, and if you are starting
     new and want our advice, we strongly recommend that you use an
     off-the-shelf software package suitable for your industry to take care
     of the steps described in this chapter automatically. When you exhaust
     off-the-shelf models, and you have the budget and need for a data
     scientist, you can easily evaluate the cost-benefit equation with the




     Figure 2.5   Overview of the Predictive Analytics Process
                An Easy Primer to Predictive Analytics for Marketers            37

experience you gained (and you’ll find it easier to convince the CFO
to make the incremental investment).

Data Collection, Cleansing, and Preparation
Data cleansing and preparation is the most important and most ignored
stage in predictive analytics. In some cases, the data might be missing or
incorrect as collected. Data cleansing is used to correct things like names
and addresses to make sure the computer will know that a customer
lives in California when her state is listed as CA. We discuss the process
of collecting customer data and linking it together to form individual
customer profiles in detail in Chapter 3. However, even after building
360 customer profiles, there still is significant work to be done getting
your data ready for analysis. Not all data collected is immediately usable
and the results could be skewed by missing data or outliers, data mea-
surements that are either too low, too high, or do not fit the underlying
data-generating system.
     If you are considering building your own predictive analytics capabil-
ities, make sure you address who will do the data collection, integration,
cleansing, and preparation. Chances are, your typical data scientist is not
going to be satisfied doing this work and is going to expect that you hire
a separate software or integration engineer to do this work.

Outlier Detection
Outlier detection often makes a big difference in the accuracy of predic-
tive models. For example, if a customer at an electronics retailer came in
and bought 50 televisions for $50,000 when the average customer at the
retailer spends $500, this high-spender will skew the average order value
metric. In electronics retailing, these types of outliers where there are few
users making large purchases are indeed quite common. People making
such large purchases could be middlemen who are buying items like
televisions to take out of the country and resell. These are not normal
consumer customers, but rather gray market resellers. If this situation
wasn’t recognized and corrected, the retailer would think these are great
VIP customers. Not recognizing this creates two problems: distorting the
definition of VIP customers so the true VIP customers would be left out
and masking an opportunity to market to this group of resellers in a more
profitable way.
38                     A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

         To correct for the outlier, your data analyst or predictive marketing
     software will need to detect and either remove the outlier or replace
     it with a number at the high end of the distribution (e.g., the lowest
     spend of the top 10 percent customers is $2,400, so replace the $50,000
     with $2,400). This replacement is only done for modeling purposes.
     Alternatively, you can treat these customers as a separate group altogether
     and create specialty programs for this one segment.
         In another example, one retailer was measuring foot traffic at each
     store but would miss out on data for certain days whenever the measur-
     ing device would get knocked off by cleaning crew. To correct for the
     missing data, the retailer applied an imputation based on the three-week
     average for the same days in the week as the missing days. Imputation is
     the art and science of replacing wrong or missing information. Depend-
     ing on the specific data elements, there are various techniques for this:

     • Replace with static or temporal averages.
     • Model the data based on other variables available. For example, you
       can model a vitamin store customer’s age based on whether she buys
       vitamins geared toward women above age 50.
     • Random selection from the underlying distribution. For example,
       if the foot traffic data is missing and this data usually follows a
       bell curve, then randomly generate a number from the underlying
       distribution.

     Imputation is a great way to make up for missing data until the problem
     is corrected at the source.
          Another example of imputation is asking customers for their birth-
     days. This is a great piece of information for modeling and action pur-
     poses but not all customers want to provide this information. In such
     cases, the predictive model would either discard the birthday as an input
     or discard customers with no birthday.

     Feature Generation and Extraction
     Once your data scientist or predictive marketing software has cleansed
     the data for missing information and outliers, there are two other factors
     to consider: (1) the data may be too large to use as is, or (2) data in its
     current representation may not be suitable for the models. Feature gen-
     eration and extraction deals with turning data into information that the
                An Easy Primer to Predictive Analytics for Marketers           39

models can digest and throwing away unnecessary or redundant infor-
mation. Think of feature generation and extraction as separating the sig-
nal from the noise. Feature extraction deals with removing unnecessary
information by either throwing it away or transforming it to eliminate
the noise. There are quite a few mathematical methods to use, but the
short explanation is to utilize algorithms to be able to extract the maxi-
mum amount of information from the data, regardless of what you will
use it for later on. This optimal extraction leads to less noisy data, hence
increasing the accuracy of predictive analytics.
    There are tricks you can use to make your data easier to use.
For example, when trying to analyze the number of orders from a
customer you can look at the numbers in absolute terms or you could
take the logarithm of the number, creating a new variable where if a cus-
tomer has 1 order or 10 orders, it’s the same difference between having
10 orders and 100 orders. It is a simple transformation that can have a
powerful impact.
    Another example could be taking the ratio of certain variables
instead of using absolute numbers. For instance, instead of return
revenue and shipped revenue per customer, you can calculate the ratio
or percentage of revenue that comes through returns.


Classifier and System Design
The next stage in the process used by data scientists or predictive mar-
keting software is choosing, architecting, and fine-tuning the correct
algorithm. In machine learning, there are two important concepts that
need to be understood. One is the no free lunch theorem, which states that
there is no inherently better algorithm for all problems out there. This is
important to understand so the data scientist chooses the right algorithm
for the right problem, and not use the same algorithm for every problem.
The other concept is called the bias-variance dilemma, which states that if
you go deep in developing an approach and algorithm to solve a specific
problem, then the system that is biased toward this specific problem gets
worse and worse performance in solving “other” problems out there.
The lesson learned here is to understand that no algorithm is inherently
better than the other. If you develop your own algorithms it means you
probably have to develop multiple algorithms for multiple situations. If
you buy off-the-shelf predictive marketing software, you want to make
40                     A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     sure to choose a vendor that focuses on your specific vertical and business
     problems, and/or to choose a vendor that has self-learning algorithms
     that can adjust to your specific situation automatically. Correctly archi-
     tected software solutions usually have multiple models competing with
     each other, and the “champion” is selected against “challengers” that is
     unique to the customer’s domain of data. This maximizes performance
     and eliminates the need for hand-coded custom models.
          Just writing an algorithm is not enough when it comes to predictive
     analytics. Before you can start to use an algorithm, you need to back-
     test that it actually works. If you use a predictive marketing software
     package, your vendor will have done this for you already. However, if
     you are developing your own predictive analytics models in-house you
     will have to worry about training, testing, and validating your models
     before you can start to use them. The time needed to develop predictive
     algorithms can be divided into 80 percent training, 10 percent testing,
     and 10 percent validation. This means that after writing the algorithm,
     data scientists need to spend considerable time training and testing the
     algorithm to make sure it works accurately.
          For example, when developing a likelihood to buy model, if 1 per-
     cent of 10 million customers buy within the next 30 days, then for
     training, we use 100,000 customers who bought in the past month and
     randomly select 100,000 customers who didn’t buy anything in the past
     month, so that the total dataset has 200,000 customers in which 50 per-
     cent bought and 50 percent didn’t. This oversampling produces better
     results, because it focuses the model to detect between potential buyers
     and non-buyers.

     The Last Mile Problem of Predictive Analytics
     Most data scientists don’t worry how marketers will use their predic-
     tions. Frankly, most data scientists don’t know enough about marketing
     and marketing systems to embed predictions into the daily routine of
     marketers. An email marketer at a large national department store once
     told us: “Brides register with us on our website and leave a lot of personal
     information. That information is in our customer data warehouse some-
     where and we probably even analyze it. However, as an email-marketing
     manager, I am unable to run a simple campaign that takes into account
                An Easy Primer to Predictive Analytics for Marketers            41

some of the preferences or dates that the bride has shared with us.”
We call this the last mile problem of predictive analytics.
     Especially in organizations with in-house data scientists, the out-
comes from predictive models are often not easily digestible or usable by
marketers. It is often very difficult for marketers to put predictive analyt-
ics into action—to connect the dots from analytics to the daily campaign
management of email, web, social, mobile, direct mail, store marketing,
and customer interactions in the call center.
     For customer predictions to be profitable, predictions need to be
put in the hands of all the customer-facing personnel in your organiza-
tion. If you can’t surface recommendations to the personnel in your call
center, the upsell might never happen. If you can’t use likelihood to buy
segments to decide whether to send an abandoned cart holder a discount
or a reminder, you are leaving a lot of profit on the table. In Chapter 14
we look at technologies that bridge this last mile problem.
     Now that you have a basic understanding of predictive models and
how they can be used for marketing, we get to work. In the rest of this
book we give you more examples of each of the three types of machine-
learning models discussed in this chapter. We cover how to use each
of these models for marketing in much detail. We also propose how to
operationalize each of the models, connect the findings to specific mar-
keting campaigns that can drive immediate revenues or profits for your
organization. Without marketing actions, there may be analysis paralysis,
thus no customer delight nor incremental profits.
CHAPTER 3



Get to Know Your
Customers First: Build
Complete Customer
Profiles

B   efore you can leverage customer data to find new growth opportuni-
    ties or hypertarget your customers, you first need to aggregate, clean,
and analyze that data. This is no easy task. If yours is like most compa-
nies, customer data is all over the place, full of errors and duplicates and
inaccessible to everyday marketers. Fortunately, predictive technology
can help clean up your data mess. Your information technology (IT)
department and potentially outside vendors can also help.
    Bosch understood that its customers were no longer only home
improvement retailers like Home Depot and Lowe’s. Instead, the rise of
online shopping allowed their end customers to go directly to its website
and engage with the brand, without ever stepping foot into a big box
store. That created a challenge for Bosch, which had limited insight into
the end-user data of who was buying their products.
    Bosch realized it had to do a better job marketing directly to its end
customers, but to do so it needed to get a better handle on its customer
data. Like many companies, Bosch did not have an internal data team
and was relying on an outside service provider. That meant that for every

                                                                               43
44                     A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     question about customers, it had to ask the external provider to create
     a new report. So Bosch decided to bring its customer data in-house
     by using modern cloud-based software, rather than to rely on an outside
     consulting firm. Now, the company can aggregate customer information
     from various data sources and link it together into individual customer
     profiles. It tracks purchases, but also newsletter signups and product reg-
     istrations. Bosch has learned that even without using customer data for
     one-to-one personalization, the 360-degree view of customers has made
     all the difference when making decisions about how to market to its cus-
     tomers. The next step is to understand how this data can be utilized to
     support marketing activities with partners like Home Depot and Lowes.
          A New York boutique fashion brand had the same experience.
     Once it collected all customer data into a single profile, it was able
     to give customer service personnel access to these records. Now if a
     customer writes or calls in to complain, it could look up if this customer
     was a high-value customer or not, and get more context overall to have
     a better conversation with this customer, and respond appropriately to
     the complaint.
          The Bosch and fashion brand examples illustrate clearly that even
     without advanced segmentation or analytics, organizing customer
     information across all customer touch points, including web, transac-
     tions, mobile, email, store, call center, into a 360-degree profile for
     each customer can be a huge win. The Bosch example also illustrates
     that customer data is not only for direct-to-consumer marketers.
     Of course, for those companies that have wholesale distribution,
     getting consumer data can be a challenge. Industry standard is such
     that wholesale partners do not pass along customer data. However,
     brands can develop a program whereby they utilize a registration
     or warranty program where they put a card in the packaging for
     consumers to sign up online to register online. The card will often
     instruct you to go to a specific registration URL with the brand
     in exchange for registering the product for future issues with the
     product or simply register their email address to get the latest product
     information and care instructions directly from the brand. Surprisingly,
     many consumers are will to do this, and though you may not have all
     the transactions associated with the purchase, you’ll have their email
     or mailing address. Service records can serve the same purpose. A
     well-known European retailer of white goods is using repair records
        Get to Know Your Customers First: Build Complete Customer Proﬁles     45

as triggers for personalized marketing campaigns. Lastly, brands selling
through wholesale may also consider using visits to their corporate
website as a proxy for product interest. Clusters can be built based on
browsing behavior alone.
     This chapter helps you understand what data you need to collect first,
if you, too, want to bring customer data in-house as a core competency,
and how to prepare your data for analysis. We will also add a few words on
how to partner successfully with your IT counterparts to bring customer
data projects to completion.


How Much Data to Collect
In this book, we focus on customer data provided to a company
directly by its customers, not data derived or purchased from third
parties. Marketers have more historical and real-time data on customers
than ever before. This type of data is also called first-party data,
data that is owned by the marketer that reflects direct interactions
of the consumer with the brand and has the richest information
compared to third-party data sources. Third-party data sources needs
to be anonymized and sometimes come close to breaching privacy
boundaries. We talk about this in more detail in later chapters. Each
individual consumer generates hundreds of data points each day, which
when multiplied by thousands or even millions of customers result in
truly big customer data. Data is said to be “big” when there is a lot
of volume, variety, and velocity. For customer data this is certainly
true. In fact, the data most companies collect from their customers
has grown so large and varied that no human being can analyze it
anymore without the help of computers and software.
    Marketers who can find a way to harness the power of all this cus-
tomer data will have a significant competitive advantage. Figure 3.1
outlines some design principles that may be useful when deciding what
data to collect. The most important design principle is to start with the
end in mind. Often, marketers make data collection and integration a
project on its own without specifically outlining what the data will be
used for and how it will be maintained to ensure it is in great shape.
    When considering how much customer data to collect, also take
into consideration how valuable that data is, as well as how easy it
is get. This may vary by company, but remember not to overdo it.
46                            A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     Design Principle for
     Data Collection             Example
     Frequency                   How frequently to collect data, and on which event triggers?
     Derived data                Derived data are implied data elements. A customer who visited
                                     the website and browsed a product five times and each time
                                     bought from a store in the following seven days could be
                                     labeled as a customer who collects information online, but
                                     shops offline.
     Granularity                 Web data could be collected click by click or in some cases
                                     a summary about the web sessions could be enough.
     Insights to be derived      If the goal is to predict customer upside potential, the type of
                                     products a customer purchases is important, as well as the zip
                                     code the customer lives in. The Insights to be derived
                                     determine which data we collect.
     Actionability               Data collected should be actionable directly or indirectly.
                                     Collecting the sports interests of customers is actionable for a
                                     sports retailer, but not for a company that does tax consulting.
     Accuracy                    When asked for age, quite a few customers randomly type
                                     answers, more often in cases where marketers use it for gating
                                     content or a sign up. Marketers need to deal with these
                                     inaccuracies through imputations. Imputations is the process
                                     of replacing missing values with substitute values.
     Fill rates                  Marketers often want to collect data on customers using
                                     progressive profiling in order to boost fill rates.
     Storage                     How much or how long to keep the data depends on the
                                     “currency” of data. Web browsing data is often not relevant
                                     after a few weeks, whereas purchases stay relevant for years.
     Accessibility               Data collected should be accessible to marketers for analysis and
                                     action. Too often customer data is stuck in silos, inaccessible
                                     to everyday marketers.

     Figure 3.1      Design Principles for Data Collection

     Many marketers obsess over collecting all customer data at once. That
     is a big mistake. It is very easy to get caught up in a long and slow data
     integration project without ever seeing results. Your goal should be to
     collect just enough data to find new growth opportunities and start
     marketing programs that deliver results. You will be surprised by how
     little information you need to get started. Once you can show results
     from your initial data-driven campaign, it will become easier to get the
     cooperation from other departments, such as your internal IT team, to
     collect more customer data.
          Get to Know Your Customers First: Build Complete Customer Proﬁles          47

    Big data inherently has a lot of noise in it. So data collection needs to
be paired with techniques to find the signal in the noise. The important
point here is to know how to extract the information from this large
dataset to make it manageable, insightful, and actionable. Figure 3.1 gives
an overview of some of the questions marketers need to answer, in col-
laboration with their technology teams, about the data to be collected,
integrated, and analyzed.


What Type of Data to Collect
Traditionally, marketers have mainly used purchase data and customer
demographic data. These days, marketers also have access to more behav-
ioral data points, which brings temporal information. This temporal
information can be used to derive context and to make marketing more
relevant in time. When we interact with a company or a brand, each of
our actions leaves a digital footprint, which gets recorded in a database.
For example, for every purchase that somebody makes online, we now
have about 50 data elements on each customer before that purchase
is even made. These include what customers clicked on in an email,
whether they clicked on Google Adwords, what reviews they may have
left, activity on social networks, complaints, and calls to customer sup-
port centers. The amount of behavioral data available has exploded in
recent years. It is easy to get overwhelmed, but not to worry. We show
you where to start.
     While no two businesses are alike, Figure 3.2 gives you an example of
what a phased data integration strategy might look like. In this example


Phase 1                    Phase 2                     Phase 3
Behavioral                 Behavioral                  Behavioral
Purchases                  Call center interaction     Social interactions
Web behavior               Returns and complaints      Reviews and surveys
Email behavior             Customer meeting notes      Loyalty program interaction
Demographic                Demographic                 Demographic
Household affiliation      Gender                      Additional third-party data
Account grouping           U.S. census data
Location                   Vertical and size

Figure 3.2       Three Steps to Customer Data Collection
48                       A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     the assumption is your end goal is to drive customer engagement and
     increase customer lifetime value.
         High-priority behavioral data for both consumer and business
     marketers includes purchases, web visits and email clicks. High-priority
     demographic data for consumer marketers could include the gender,
     age, and location of a customer, and for business marketers, more likely
     the industry, size of the organization, title of the buyer, and the location
     of the buyer’s headquarters. Purchases alone will already give you a
     wealth of information. In fact, every single purchase generates lots of
     interesting meta-data points, such as time and location of the purchase,
     product purchased, and the sales person involved in the transaction.
     Figure 3.3 summarizes more of these points. We will describe each of
     the different data types and how to collect them in detail in Appendix A.


                  Data You Can Collect at the Time of Purchase
                  Time of the purchase
                  Date of the purchase
                  Date of shipment
                  Billing address for the purchase
                  Shipping address for the purchase
                  Name of the buyer
                  Gender of the buyer (derived from the name)
                  Shipping revenues
                  How long ago was this purchase
                  Channel of the purchase (for example, online or offline)
                  Product that was purchased
                  Product category that was purchased
                  Brand that was purchased
                  Salesperson involved in the purchase (B2B and B2C)
                  Price of the purchase
                  Discount applied to the purchase
                  Revenues generated by the purchase
                  Cost of goods sold for the purchase
                  Margin of the purchase
                  Tax collected on the purchase
                  Shipping revenues associated with the purchase
                  Whether this was the first purchase or a repeat order
                  Number of products in the order
                  Types of products included in the order
                  What type of device the customer used to make the purchase

     Figure 3.3   The Anatomy of a Purchase
        Get to Know Your Customers First: Build Complete Customer Proﬁles     49

     A special challenge exists when it comes to in-store or other
in-person purchases. Many store purchases are anonymous. You might
try to collect email addresses in the store by offering customers an
electronic receipt or an incentive in exchange for an in-store newslet-
ter signup. You might also give store associates a discount or other
compensation to collect email addresses.
     For a well-run program, expect in-store capture rates above 60% and
as high as 95%. Improving data capture rates can dramatically improve
the success of in-store clienteling. Clienteling is a technique used by
retail sales associates to establish long-term relationships with key cus-
tomers based on data about their preferences, behaviors, and purchases.
Clienteling is intended to guide associates to provide more personal and
informed customer service that may influence customer behavior related
to shopping frequency, lift in average transaction value, and other retail
key performance indicators. From the customer’s perspective, clientel-
ing “could add a layer of personal touch” to the shopping experience.
Clienteling with big data dramatically improves upsells and consumer
satisfaction because the consumer develops a relationship with a sales
associate that has a vested interest in securing their loyalty. Retention
rates improve dramatically for brands that make 360 customer profiles
available to sales associates and that associate consumer transactions with
individual sales associates.
     Mavi, the international jeans and Apparel Company from Chapter 2,
wanted to tie POS transactions to customers to understand customers
individually. Mavi introduced a loyalty card program to accomplish
this. When it started the program, in its first year, only 20 percent of
transactions were tied to individual customer. By year four it had tied
close to 90 percent of transactions to individuals. There are a few things
Mavi did right when introducing this program: First, it put goals and
measurement in place and always focused on improving. Second, it
delighted customers with the data it collected, for example by sending
them highly personalized offers to come back to the store and get
extra points to buy again. By doing so, customers wanted to identify
themselves, because they saw the benefits. Third, the store personnel
saw the benefits and were always educated about why they did it. It was
a cultural focus and shift.
50                     A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

         Loyalty program interaction itself is another important data point:
     the use of loyalty rewards can be very different from customer to cus-
     tomer. In fact, we have found that when grouping customers based on
     their behavior, the use of loyalty points is often a differentiating factor
     and some groups of customers— such as men—are more inclined to be
     swayed by reward offers than others.
         In another example, Walmart created a mobile application called
     Savings Catcher, which promised customers who downloaded the app
     that Walmart would compare the prices of their purchases against prices
     offered by Walmart’s competitors and refund customers the difference
     when it found a lower price at another retail store. By providing an
     incentive to customers, Walmart was able to collect millions of email
     addresses and analyze information, like which products customers
     bought and what time they typically went shopping.
         Business purchases are likely tracked in your enterprise resource
     management system or customer relationship management system.
     These systems are also a rich source of demographic information, such
     as the location of the customer and the relationship between contacts
     and accounts, as well as between salespeople and accounts.

     Preparing Your Data for Analysis
     When it comes to your customer database the saying “garbage in, garbage
     out” holds true. If you base your customer segmentation or predictive
     models on bad or incomplete customer data profiles, you will get the
     wrong recommendations for your customers. Therefore, data wrangling
     is a huge part of the job. Data scientists will tell you that data preparation
     before analysis can make up 95 percent of all the work.
          Without a single view of the customer, it is impossible to truly
     understand any single customer or to draw any conclusions about cus-
     tomer trends. For example, if you can only see a person’s in-store pur-
     chases, but that person makes 90 percent of his or her purchases online,
     you may believe this is an unprofitable customer when in reality this
     person could be one of your VIPs. Similarly, if somebody frequently
     browses your website but always ends up buying in the store, you may
     mistake the website customer as “low value.” In a different scenario, a
     customer spends a large amount and buys often, but returns items just as
     frequently or makes frequent calls into your call center. This customer
     looks like a “high value” customer, but is in fact unprofitable.
        Get to Know Your Customers First: Build Complete Customer Proﬁles     51




Figure 3.4   The Data Preparation Process


    This means that you need to be able to integrate, link, and dedu-
plicate all the information that you have collected. This is not an easy
task. Figure 3.4 gives you an overview of the data preparation process at
a high level. We will go through each of the steps in the data preparation
process briefly.

Cleaning and Validation of Names
After receiving the raw data, the first thing you want to do is to validate
the names, postal addresses, email addresses, and phone numbers in the
customer files you received. Without this, software algorithms will be
unable to link the right activities to the right data records. Examples of
common mistakes that need to be corrected before matching records to
real people include:

• Middle names or initials might be included or excluded: William L
  and William Louis might both be variations of the same person—
  William Morrison.
• Two-person contacts might not be matched unless corrected:
  “William & Cathy Morrison” should be matched to William
  Morrison’s customer record.
• Replacing abbreviated names: Wm and Bill and William may all be
  the same person.
• Removing honorifics: Rev. Bill Morrison and Dr. Bill should both
  be matched to William Morrison’s record.
• First and last name swapped: Bill Morrison and Morrison Bill are
  likely the same person, especially if they live at the same address.
• Slight variations in name spelling, like Katie and Cathy.

    There are many common mistakes that software can easily correct.
Software can automatically normalize names, such as change Bill to
William or vice versa, and recognize and tag men and women.
52                     A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     Metaphonic algorithms are also correct words that have similar pronun-
     ciation, such as Katherine, Cathy, and so on. Software can automatically
     standardize names so that different records from the same customer
     will now match and be linked to a single customer ID. For example,
     Michael is the same as Mike and James is the same as Jim, and so
     forth. As part of name standardization and verification, software can
     also change the case of the name. So if the name was in all capitals
     (WILLIAM) or all lowercase (william) we make it have first letter capital,
     remainder lowercase (William). This may seem trivial, but software
     algorithms are not people—and tend to take things literally. Without
     correction and normalization, these records would not be matched to the
     same person.


     Cleaning and Validation of Addresses
     For mailing addresses, validation is important to make sure that each
     piece of expensive direct mail you are sending is actually deliverable.
     Address validation can reduce mailing costs by as much as 80 percent.
     These are some ways to validate mailing addresses:

     • Canada and U.S. address coding according to USPS standards. Make sure
       that the address is complete and correctly written including a zip code
       with a four-digit append to have the most accurate address possible.
     • NCOA (National Change of Address). Each address in your database can
       be checked against the NCOA database to make sure that the recipient
       has not moved since you acquired his or her address.
     • CASS certification. CASS certification is a requirement for all mailers
       in order to receive certain mailing rates from the USPS based on the
       quality of their addresses.
     • DPV (Delivery Point Validation). This is the highest level of address
       accuracy checking—where each address gets checked against a
       data file to ensure that it exists as an active delivery point for
       the USPS.
     • Address type flag. If relevant, address parsing can also append an address
       type flag, such as whether the address is a residence or a business.
     • MSA/region append. Based on each address, software can append the
       longitude and latitude of the location, but can also match this against
       administrative regions.
        Get to Know Your Customers First: Build Complete Customer Proﬁles       53

    Email address validation is equally important. Email verification ser-
vices can improve client reach and reduce the danger of damaging your
sender reputation. Checks that can be performed automatically include:

• Syntax correction. Syntax correction in names and addresses automat-
  ically removes illegal characters and fixes host names. For example,
  software algorithms can automatically fix common domain name mis-
  spellings (gmai1.com = gmail.com, for example). Software could also
  validate and correct illegal characters. For example, if it says gmail,com
  instead of gmail.com, the correction would be to replace the comma
  with the period.
• Mail test. As part of validating email addresses, software can automati-
  cally “ping” the domain in the email address to ensure this domain is
  available as a mail exchange. Software can also automatically maintain
  a list of invalid emails.
• Invalid email filtering. Certain common default values, such as
  noemail@email.com, can automatically be detected and filtered out.
• Casing standardization. As with names, when it comes to checking
  emails, software can automatically standardize all addresses to include
  only lowercase letters.


Linking and Deduplication
To eliminate duplicate copies of repeating data, you can use a technique
called deduplication. It is important because it can increase the accuracy
of key performance indicators and metrics (like the lifetime value of a
customer). It also helps you avoid targeting the same person twice, which
doesn’t look very professional and can be very expensive when it comes
to campaigns like direct mail. The attributes of each of your contacts
should be merged according to a set of priority rules to obtain a master
contact list. At this time, you should also associate the right contacts with
the right households or the right corporations.
     In order to accurately deduplicate your data, you can use software
algorithms to do what’s called fuzzy matching. Fuzzy algorithms com-
pute a similarity score between attributes such as Names or Addresses.
When the similarity is higher than a defined threshold, the entities are
considered duplicates. Hence fuzzy logic will “estimate” whether two
customer names that are similar, but not exactly the same, might be
54                     A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     the same person. Some customer attributes, such as a customer’s home
     address, will have a higher weighting in this estimation. William Morri-
     son and Bill Morrison are likely the same person if they live at the same
     address, but unlikely the same person if they live in different states.
          Now that all the hard work of collecting and cleaning customer data
     is done, in Figure 3.5 we give an example of the information that may be
     included in the profile of a single customer. Just with this profile alone
     there is a lot of value. You could give your sales team, customer success
     team, call center team, or in-store personnel access to these profiles and
     they will surely be able to serve customers better with this type of infor-
     mation at their fingertips. In the next chapters we take the next steps
     to actually using this information for customer analytics and to create
     unique and meaningful experiences for each and every customer.
          It is not unusual to make important discoveries about your customers
     after integrating all customer data. In the case of a jewelry company, they
     found that though 70% of the product line featured women’s jewelry,
     50% of the buyers were men buying jewelry as gifts. This group was
     virtually untapped until a demographic append was done to uncover
     this target. Even women purchasing jewelry were often shopping for
     presents, such as heirlooms for daughters and sons for special occasions
     like graduations from high school and college. Lastly, after collecting
     all customer data, this company found that there was very little overlap
     between metal types. Gold buyers continued to buy gold and silver buy-
     ers continued to buy silver. Of course all of these insights changed their
     marketing strategy entirely.


     Working with IT on Data Integration
     We highly recommend that you work with your information technol-
     ogy (IT) department when collecting and integrating data into a single,
     real-time view of the customer, so we want to conclude this chapter
     with some advice for successfully partnering with your IT team:
         Don’t go it alone. A study by the CMO Club found that 88% of mar-
     keting executives admit that projects run outside of IT control “some-
     times” (53%) or “often” (35%) run into problems. According to a 2014
     Accenture report, only one in 10 marketing and IT executives say col-
     laboration between the two departments is at the right level. CIOs are
     in a key position to guide technology initiatives across the organization,
         Get to Know Your Customers First: Build Complete Customer Proﬁles                55

General demographic                      Predictive analytics
• Name                                   • Likelihood to buy (“high”)
• Email                                  • Behavior-based cluster (“discount
• Gender                                   junkie”)
• LinkedIn search                        • Product-based cluster (“laptop buyer”)
• Address                                • Brand-based cluster (“Dell”)
• Location (latitude and longitude)      • Life cycle cluster (“new customer”)
• Google Map view of Address             • Product recommendations

Contact strategy                         Life cycle cluster values could include
• Preferred channel                      • Prospective customer
• Preferred store                        • New customer
• Closest store                          • Repeat customer
• Preferred brand                        • Lapsed one-time customer
• Marketable by Phone? (Y/N)             • Lapsed repeat customer
• Marketing by Mail? (Y/N)               • Inactive one-time customer
• Marketable by Email? (Y/N)             • Inactive repeat customer

Purchase analytics                       Behavior
• Lifetime revenue (for example,         • Last order date
  $2,007)                                • Last order channel
• Lifetime margin (for example, $576)    • Last order revenue
• Lifetime order count                   • Last web visit date
• Last 12 months revenue                 • Web visit count
• Last 12 months margin                  • Last send date
• Last 12 months order count             • Last open date
• Average Order Value                    • Last click date
• Last 12 Months Revenue Segment         • Email open count last month
  (for example “top percent of           • Email open count two months prior
  customers”)                            • Email click count last month
• Prior 12 Months Revenue Segment        • Email click count two months prior
• Revenue Trend (Up, Neutral, or         • First order date
  Down)                                  • First order channel
                                         • First order revenue
                                         • Distinct channels
                                         • Distinct products
                                         • Distinct categories
                                         • Last five orders (channel/date/product/
                                           brand)
                                         • Last five on site search (search term, date)

Figure 3.5     Example of a Customer Profile
56                      A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     ensuring reliability, data privacy, security, and compatibility with the cor-
     porate technology stack amongst others. As a marketer you can play the
     role of “chief experience officer” but accept IT as a strategic partner
     with marketing, not just as a platform provider.
         Be clear in what data you will need. Show the IT team what you will
     use and what impact it could have. Be prepared to parse out what you
     need versus what you want just for the heck of it. You’d be amazed at
     how much the IT folks can achieve once they are “in the know” and
     you acknowledge how valuable their contribution is!
         Ask for self-service access to the data. Too often IT builds a customer data
     warehouse that can only be accessed through SQL queries. This is bad
     for IT because now each time you have a question about customers, or
     need a segment, IT will have to do work. This is also bad for marketing,
     because with each request you submit you need to “wait in line” behind
     other projects.
         Make sure IT knows your existing technology stack. If you ask IT for help
     with data integration, make sure you outline what you ultimately want
     to do with the data. If you ask for data integration only, you may get
     a customer data warehouse that is hard to access (see #3) but also that
     doesn’t talk to your existing campaign execution tools.
         Discuss ongoing requirements. Make sure that IT doesn’t only focus on
     the initial development and deployment, but understands your needs for
     ongoing updates. Customer data changes so quickly that, at a minimum,
     you will need daily updated customer profiles and segments. Data inte-
     gration and cleansing really is an ongoing process, and scheduling IT
     resources on a one-time basis is not sufficient. Too often, IT will deliver
     a solution with too many manual steps, making it cost prohibitive
     to update profiles and segments more than once a quarter. Instead
     marketing needs near real-time, and therefore automated, updates.
         Start small and iterate quickly. Together you can come up with a
     roadmap that makes sense. Perhaps don’t ask for all data to be integrated
     at once. Start by capturing all digital data from email and your website
     for example, and get your feet wet with campaigns that use just these
     data sources. After you have proven success, it will be easier to justify
     the incremental investment to add other data sources such as your store
     transaction systems.
        Get to Know Your Customers First: Build Complete Customer Proﬁles       57

     Be empathetic to the IT team. Acknowledge the challenges of the IT
team. If the IT team is struggling to put the data together, suggest a
simpler ask. Have an idea of what your true deadlines are. Don’t be afraid
to get a drink together. Reach out and ask for their ideas on what they
think you are missing, how you could simplify your marketing report or
data! Trust helps.
     Get outside help. Introduce IT to some of your marketing vendors.
They may have expertise in ongoing data integration, cleansing and anal-
ysis. Data integration is a specialized skill and it may not be something
that your IT group does every day. Also, your IT organization may not
be familiar with these vendors so you could champion a solution.
     Involve IT early. Early in the project, schedule a data discovery call
where you involve the IT organization to define the use cases/business
requirements for the data integration.
     Assign dedicated resources. Treat data integration as a separate project
deserving of its own project manager. The project manager can be in
IT or marketing. In either case, make sure there is one specific, named
person in IT to work with on scoping your project, selecting a vendor,
and seeing the project to completion.


One Hundred Questions to Ask Your Data
Once you have all your data in one place, you can start to understand
your business and your customers better using this data. The list that
follows is a place for you to start. The questions to ask are endless, but
we thought it would be useful to get an idea of some of the things you
can learn from centralized customer data.


Sales
  1. How many new customers am I acquiring each month?
  2. What is our true cost to acquire new customers?
  3. What is my revenue per customer? How is it trending?
  4. How seasonal are my revenue and margin?
  5. Is most of my revenue coming from new or repeat buyers?
  6. Is most of my margin coming from new or repeat buyers?
58                   A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

       7. What is my annual total number of orders of products I shipped?
       8. What is my order value by month: do some months see larger deals?
       9. What is my annual average order value and how is it trending over
          time?
      10. How does my revenue break down by access device (mobile, tablet,
          etc.)?
      11. How does my revenue break down by geography?
      12. How does my revenue break down by store or by sales representa-
          tive?
      13. How much of my revenue come from non-marketable customers?

     Customers
     Product clusters
      14. How many customers are in each product-based cluster?
      15. How much is each product-based cluster member worth?
      16. Which product-based cluster produces the most revenue?
      17. Which brand-based cluster produces the most margin?
      18. What channel does each product-based cluster prefer?

     Brand clusters
      19. How many customers are in each brand-based cluster?
      20. How much is each brand-based cluster member worth?
      21. Which brand-based cluster produces the most revenue?
      22. Which brand-based cluster produces the most margin?
      23. What channel does each brand-based cluster prefer?

     Behavioral clusters
      24. How many customers are in each behavioral cluster?
      25. How much is each behavioral cluster member worth?
      26. Which behavioral cluster produces the most revenue?
      27. Which behavioral cluster produces the most margin?
      28. What channel does each behavioral cluster prefer?
      29. What percentage of my customers are discount buyers?
      30. What percentage of my customers are frequent buyers?
      31. What percentage of my customers are full-price (high-margin)
          buyers?
      32. What percentage of my customers are one-time buyers?
       Get to Know Your Customers First: Build Complete Customer Proﬁles   59

 33. Who are my high-return complainers?
 34. Who are my seasonal customers?
 35. Who are my single channel customers?

Lifetime value
 36. Who are my most valuable customers?
 37. What is the (predicted) lifetime value of my top 10% of customers?
 38. What % of revenues comes from my top 10% (or bottom 10%) of
      customers?
 39. What is the order frequency of my top 10% (or bottom 10%) of
      customers?
 40. What brands do the highest spenders prefer?
 41. What product categories do the highest spenders prefer?
 42. What channels do the highest spenders prefer?
 43. How to define a VIP?
 44. How many high-value customers do I have that are at risk of
      leaving?
 45. What is my share of wallet for each customer (by customer seg-
      ment)?
 46. What is my upside in each and every customer?
 47. Which accounts have a high potential lifetime value, but a low
      penetration?
 48. What is the predicted lifetime value by gender?
 49. Is the predicted lifetime value of bargain hunters lower?
 50. Is the lifetime value of mobile shoppers higher or lower?
 51. What brand preferences do my most valuable customers have?
 52. Is the lifetime value of loyalty program participants higher than
      average?

Likelihood to buy
 53. What is the revenue (and margin) impact of offering free shipping?
 54. Did discounts drive incremental sales?
 55. Did discounts drive incremental margin—considering the costs of
      the promotion?
 56. What are the best incentives to give to each of our customers?
 57. Which are my high potential leads of people coming in?
 58. Should I charge a membership fee?
 59. Which existing customers are most likely to buy again?
60                   A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     Life cycle stage
      60. How many active customers do I have (who bought in the past
           12 months)?
      61. How many of my customers have lapsed?
      62. Is most of my revenue and margin coming from new or repeat
           customers?
      63. How quickly will a buyer typically make their second purchase?
      64. How many customers can I re-engage with a replenishment
           campaign?
      65. How many customers can I re-engage with a new customer
           welcome campaign?
      66. How many buyers with known emails have been to my website
           recently but did not purchase?
      67. How many customers have recently opened an email but did not
           buy in a long time?
      68. Should I focus on retention?
      69. Are my new customers returning (and is this getting better or
           worse)?
      70. How many multi-time buyers do I have and when did they last
           purchase?
      71. Which customers are at risk of churn?

     Demographics
      72. How many individual households buy from me?
      73. What is the average order value by gender?
      74. What is the distance to my closest store for each customer
          (segment)?

     Recommendations
      75. What product to recommend to each customer next?
      76. What is the primary channel for each of my customers?

     Marketing/Channels
      77. How many shopping carts are being abandoned each month?
      78. How many web searches are being abandoned each month?
      79. What is the revenue per email and how is this changing over time?
      80. How many engaged subscribers actually read my emails?
       Get to Know Your Customers First: Build Complete Customer Proﬁles   61

 81. Is my number of engaged subscribers growing or declining?
 82. What is the performance of my direct marketing campaigns?
 83. What programs are giving me the best return?
 84. Which promotions drive the most sales?
 85. Does my catalogue add profits?
 86. Which customers have not received any emails from me in the past
     year?
 87. What percentages of my sales come from which channel?
 88. What percentage of margin comes from which channel?
 89. How are my sales trending by channel (annual revenue by channel)?
 90. How are my sales trending by channel (monthly revenue by
     channel)?
 91. How is my margin trending by channel?
 92. Which channel gets us the most profitable customers?
 93. Which channel gets us the most loyal customers?

Products
 94. What is my revenue and margin by product category?
 95. How many people can I target with my product introduction
     campaign?
 96. What product categories are performing the best?
 97. What is the purchase frequency of certain product categories?
 98. Are people in a specific zip code area buying specific products?
 99. Which customers will be interested in this new product/
     content/event, etc.?
100. How many different products types does each customer buy
     from us?
CHAPTER 4



Managing Your
Customers as a Portfolio
to Improve Your
Valuation

T   he best way for any business to maximize enterprise or shareholder
    value is to maximize the customer lifetime value, or profitability, for
each and every customer. Customers are the most important assets for a
firm and therefore customer lifetime value is the most important metric
in marketing. If you maximize the lifetime value, or profitability, of each
and every customer, you also maximize the profitability and valuation of
your company as a whole.
    The best way to optimize lifetime value for any customer is to give
that customer the best possible experience throughout the life cycle of
their interaction with your brand: from their first exposure to your brand
to becoming paying customers, coming back a second time, and even-
tually turning into loyal brand advocates for your business. Predictive
marketing explains how you can optimize the lifetime value for every
prospect and customer. Now that marketers have more detailed infor-
mation on past, current, and future needs of customers at their fingertips,
delighting each customer one at a time is finally possible.


                                                                              63
64                     A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

         The best way to optimize lifetime value for all customers is to adopt a
     portfolio approach. Marketers need to recognize that different groups of
     customers have different value and different behaviors and take different
     actions based on these distinct customer segments. We cover types of
     clustering in another chapter, but changing the mentality from single
     value focus to managing a portfolio of values is important. You need
     a different strategy for those customers who are at risk of leaving you
     than for those who already have a high likelihood to buy. You will need
     to adjust your thinking and budget for customers that are unprofitable
     compared with more profitable customers.
         We sometimes hear marketers get the advice to “fire” unprofitable
     customers, or just focus on high-value customers, but this is a mistake.
     Every customer contributes to revenue, and when you acquire customers
     and manage a portfolio, there is always a mix. The important focus is the
     mix and how this mix is trending.


     What Is Customer Lifetime Value?
     In general, customer lifetime value is a term that describes how much
     revenue or profit you can expect from customers over their lifetime doing
     business with you. There are a couple of different ways to calculate and
     use lifetime value, depending on the marketing problem at hand.


     Historical Lifetime Value
     Historical lifetime value or LTV for short is defined as the actual profits—
     gross margin minus direct costs—from customers over their lifetime
     so far, adjusted by subtracting the acquisition cost of those customers.
     Note that historical lifetime value only takes into account past pur-
     chases, not future purchases. The only time to use historical lifetime,
     rather than predicted customer value, is when you are trying to detect if
     the customer value of a specific customer or customer segment is trend-
     ing up or down. A customer might have spent $500 two years ago, but
     only $200 in the last year. It is this change in lifetime value that sig-
     nals underlying trends, risks, and opportunities. If a customer’s historical
     lifetime value is trending down, this is called value migration, and this
     can be an early warning signal of customers unsubscribing from your
     service or planning to stop buying from your website. Detecting value
         Managing Your Customers as a Portfolio to Improve Your Valuation       65

migration allows you to catch customers before they walk out the door
and it is too late to win them back. Identifying a change in histori-
cal lifetime value allows you to implement a reactivation or proactive
churn campaign to turn the tide.
      Beyond value migration, customers may be changing their spend-
ing habits in other important ways. A certain customer may have made
only one big purchase last year, but this year they are making smaller
purchases more often. While the customer lifetime value of this per-
son has not changed, your marketing approach and goals for the person
should change.
      In order to accurately calculate historical lifetime value, you need
to be able to link all purchases made by the same person—even if that
person used slightly different emails, names, or addresses. The average
American has three email addresses. If you are like most companies,
you may have separate order databases for different channels. The orders
from the web are often recorded separately from the brick-and-mortar
store purchases and those are separate from sales made through the call
center. Unless you can link purchases from these separate channels to the
same physical person, you will not have an accurate picture of lifetime
value. For some products, it might be important to also understand the
total value of a household or an account. Perhaps I spend only very little
with a brand myself, but by acquiring me, the brand has also acquired
the revenues from my spouse and children. When comparing the costs
to acquire me to the revenues of my entire household, I could be a very
profitable investment. The only way to do this is to make sure you can
associate family members of a household to each other. Similarly, in busi-
ness marketing you need to be able to associate different buyers in the
same company with the master account to understand the true value of
a customer.
      We recommend that you take the cost to service a customer into
account whenever you can in order to calculate historical lifetime value.
This includes returns and discounts, as well as product cost. On average,
9 percent of all retail sales in the United States are returned by consumers,
so ignoring returns would skew the results. Some practitioners calculate
LTV without the acquisition cost. If LTV is being utilized to make acqui-
sition decisions, acquisition cost should be taken into account. However,
if it is for existing customers, acquisition cost is a sunk cost and should
not be used.
66                     A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     Predicted Customer Value
     Predicted customer value is the projected value, revenues, and costs,
     adjusted for the time-value of money, of a customer looking forward
     several years. Your average retention rate will tell you how many years in
     the future, on average, you will retain a customer and how many years
     of future revenues to take into account. We typically look one to three
     years ahead when calculating predicted customer value.
          Predicted customer value is very useful, especially when deciding
     how much money to invest in acquiring or retaining a specific customer.
     If you were to only look at historical lifetime value, you would signifi-
     cantly underestimate the potential of a customer and likely underinvest
     in the acquisition or retention of certain customers. It can also be used
     to identify high-value customers very early in the life cycle. After her
     first purchase, a future high-value customer looks just like everybody
     else. If you could recognize the high-potential customer early in the life
     cycle, you could start differentiated treatment right then and there and
     increase the odds this high-value customer will stick with you.
          One person might have just bought this expensive jacket but he
     might have only been a customer for two months, but another customer
     might have been a customer for five years and bought the same jacket.
     If you were to look at historical lifetime value, you might draw the con-
     clusion that one customer is more valuable than the other. However,
     these two might very well become equal value customers and should
     probably be treated in much the same way. If you look at historical
     lifetime value you look too much at old customers and will miss the
     opportunity to acquire or retain more recent, high-potential, customers.
          With predictive analytics, you can estimate the future value of a cus-
     tomer by comparing a customer to the thousands or millions of others
     that have come before them. You can predict future lifetime value by
     finding customers that look just like them. From the example we used
     earlier, buying a certain type of jacket may very well be an early indicator
     of a well-known pattern of behavior for a high-value customer. Even if
     predicted customer value is not accurate in absolute dollar terms, the
     rank order it provides gives the marketer focus on the right segment
     and trends.
         Managing Your Customers as a Portfolio to Improve Your Valuation      67

     Here are some examples of factors that can signal future lifetime
value. Predictive marketing software typically looks at hundreds of factors
like these but will only use those that actually correlate with future
lifetime value in your particular company or situation:

• Recency of engagement: The recency of purchases, web visits,
  reviews, and email clicks may all be important predictors of future
  purchases and thus future customer value.
• Size of the first order: Customers who make a large first order are
  more likely to end up being valuable shoppers.
• Discount on the first order: Customers who buy full price are more
  likely to become valuable over their lifetime.
• Multiple types of products in the first order: Buying from different
  categories, such as shoes and electronics, in your first order is a signal
  of future customer value.
• Time between orders: Most valuable shoppers make frequent pur-
  chases and thus a shopper who places a second order quickly is more
  likely to become a high-value customer.
• Time spent on website: The more time prospects or customers spend
  on your website, the higher their likelihood to buy and the higher
  their predicted customer value.
• Social and email engagement: Customer engagement of any kind,
  including email opens and clicks or social engagement, are great pre-
  dictors for likelihood to buy and predicted customer value. Often it
  is not the amount of engagement that matters, but the consistency or
  frequency of engagement. Spending a little time every day is a more
  reliable indicator than spending hours sporadically.
• Acquisition source: It turns out that certain channels drive higher
  value customers than others. The customer who came from a fashion
  blog may have a higher predictive value than the customer acquired
  through a banner ad.
• Geography: Customers in certain zip codes have a greater predicted
  customer value than others. Rural populations tend to be more stable,
  move less frequently, and therefore have more loyal purchase behavior.
  Zip codes can sometimes predict what type of products people buy.
68                    A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

       For example, zip codes with many apartment buildings have a low
       predicted customer value for certain products, such as lawn mowers.
     • Seasonality: Retail customers who are acquired during the holidays
       tend to be about 14 percent less valuable than those acquired during
       other times of the year.
     • Personal referrals: People who came to your brand through a per-
       sonal referral tend to be more loyal than those who buy because of an
       advertisement.

         Predictions about lifetime value are not destiny. Marketers can do
     much to change the course of history here. Take, for example, the
     fact that shoppers acquired during the holidays tend to be less valuable
     and less loyal than shoppers acquired at other times during the year.
     One skincare company decided to focus its retention efforts on this
     holiday cohort specifically. It set up an email marketing campaign to
     increase brand loyalty among new Cyber Monday customers, sending
     regular reminders for refills and recommending other products of
     interest. They were able to reverse the trend, and lifetime value of these
     new holiday customers is now 5 percent higher than the company
     average. By focusing on specific outreach to underserved customer
     segments, the company was able to offer personalized promotions that
     ultimately drove greater brand loyalty. The important lesson is that once
     customers are acquired, the best strategy is to focus on engaging them
     to grow and retain them, ignoring the cost of acquisition.


     Upside Lifetime Value
     Upside lifetime value, which is also called size of wallet, calculates how
     much more money a customer still has to spend with you. This is money
     that the customer is already spending at your competition to buy the
     products you offer. Algorithms can figure out size of wallet by com-
     paring a customer to other like-minded customers. It is important for
     marketers to focus on what size the wallet is, because it is always easier
     to grow a relationship with an existing customer than to acquire a new
     one. Unfortunately, most marketers have been taught to focus more on
     new customer acquisition than on engaging and retaining existing cus-
     tomers. Especially if the customers have high upside potential, marketers
     should focus on how to deepen their relationship by introducing them
         Managing Your Customers as a Portfolio to Improve Your Valuation       69

to new products or serving them in a differentiated way. Very few com-
panies calculate and utilize the upside or share of wallet potential of a
customer, yet it can be a very powerful way to identify customers to
focus on.
    The critical difference between future lifetime value and share of
wallet is often in the types of products that are factored into the analysis.
For future lifetime value, you tend to look at just those products that a
customer is already buying from you. For example, I may be a hockey
player, and I may be buying my hockey tape from a specific outlet every
couple of months. Based on this, the company can project that if they
retain me, I will buy a lot more hockey tape in the future and perhaps
have a predicted lifetime value of $300. However, because I am buying
hockey tape, I am likely in the market for skate sharpening, hockey sticks,
and occasional gear upgrades. I am clearly buying those things elsewhere
right now. If I were to buy all of my gear at the same place I buy my
tape, my future lifetime value is probably well over $1,000.
    Let’s look at another example, this time in business marketing.
An electronics company has quite a few customers who only buy inkjet
cartridges for printers. They buy these cartridges regularly and spend
$20,000 a year on average, leading you to think it’s a great customer.
But the fact they are buying these high-end cartridges means that they
probably also have a big office with servers, laptops, and other products
that could use services or add-on products that you are not selling to
them. The fact that you are not selling those other products to them is
a missed opportunity.
    You can use share of wallet analysis to find upsell targets, as one
business software company did. It took all of its business customers and
broke out those that were similar in size and industry. Out of 100,000
customers, they found 20,000 businesses in the insurance industry with
100 to 150 employees. They then divided these customers into value
segments. The top 25 percent of these small insurance companies spent
$30,000 a year, the next 25 percent spent $10,000 a year, the third 25 per-
cent spent $5,000 a year, and the bottom 25 percent spent $1,000 a year.
All of these businesses are similar, and they all have a similar spend-
ing potential. Maybe not all of them will be large customers spending
$30,000 a year, but all should at least be able to spend $10,000 a year,
or as much as the second group. This means that for all the customers
in the $1,000 bucket, you have an upside potential to sell more products
70                          A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

     and services of $9,000, and for the customers in the $5,000 bucket you
     have an upside potential of $5,000.

     Increase Customer Lifetime Value
     for One Customer
     The customer life cycle is a term used to describe the progression of
     steps a customer goes through when considering, purchasing, using, and
     maintaining loyalty to a product or a service. The customer life cycle
     emphasizes the individual journey of each customer and encourages mar-
     keters to think about the right approach to every customer. The life cycle
     model underscores the importance of customer repeat engagement with
     a brand. A marketer’s job is try to give customers the best possible expe-
     rience at any point during their life cycle or journey with your brand
     and—in doing so—increase the loyalty and the value of those customers.
          Figure 4.1 gives an overview of some of the strategies a marketer
     could use in the acquisition, growth and retention phase of a customer’s
     life cycle. Some of these programs have significantly higher return on
     investment than traditional broadcast marketing techniques. Whereas the
     average open rate of a broadcast email is about 14% and the average
     revenue per email sent $0.05, the various campaigns that are triggered
     by a customer’s life cycle can see open rates that are two or three times
     higher and revenue per email up to $6 per email, a whopping 130 times
     the average of a broadcast email.


     Acquire
     It often takes many interactions to acquire a new customer. Once you
     have acquired this customer, you have engaged in a transaction, but you
     can’t really speak of a customer relationship just yet. In some industries,
     like retail, 70 percent of customers never come back to buy a second


     Acquisition                    Growth                           Retention
     Look-alike targeting           Repeat purchase program          Loyalty appreciation
     Remarketing                    Cluster-based targeting          Customer reactivation

     Figure 4.1     Sample Life Cycle Marketing Strategies
         Managing Your Customers as a Portfolio to Improve Your Valuation    71

time. Your primary goal when it comes to acquiring new customers
it to acquire the right customers. Some people simply have a higher
likelihood to become large, loyal customers. When it comes to acqui-
sition you can focus on acquiring these more loyal customers using
look-alike targeting. You can also increase conversion of prospects to
buyers using remarketing techniques. Both will be discussed in greater
detail in Chapter 11.


Grow
Your primary goal for newly acquired customers is to turn them from
one-time buyers into repeat customers. Once a customer comes back
and buys a second time, you have now started a relationship. It changes
the dynamics completely. Whereas retention rates for one-time buyers in
retail are around 30 percent, the retention rate for two-time buyers jumps
to 70 percent. A repeat purchase program and cluster-based targeting
are just two examples of strategies that you might use to grow customer
value. Chapter 12 is entirely dedicated to customer growth strategies.


Retain
Even when you have maximized your share of wallet with a customer,
your job is not yet done. Your primary strategy for loyal customers is to
recognize and appreciate them. With social media and the Internet, the
power of word of mouth is stronger than ever. A loyal brand advocate
can bring yet more customer revenue by referring you to their friends
or family, or by raving about you publicly and influencing strangers to
also buy from you. Not all churn is created equal. It is especially impor-
tant to retain your high value customers. Loyalty appreciation and lapsed
customer reactivation are just two of many strategies you can use to
proactively retain your customers. Chapter 13 will introduce various
retention metrics and methodologies.

    In France, the telecommunication company Orange developed
a comprehensive strategy to preserve its customer base, when a new
entrant disrupted the market by introducing plans 50 percentage cheaper
than the existing ones. The marketing strategy included actions at every
stage of the customer life cycle:
72                    A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer

          From an acquisition standpoint, the operator created new, more
     attractive plans to adapt to its new competitor. On the one hand, the
     company built a new low price brand to target the digital and price sen-
     sitive segment (specific target of the new entrant). On the other hand,
     fierce competition of the other existing operators pushed the company
     to reduce its standard plans by 20 percentage. The average revenue
     per user (ARPU), revenue and margin were at risk, since the existing
     customer had the opportunity to massively migrate to cheaper plans.
          To limit value destruction, the firm developed a massive “Personal-
     ized Customer Program,” in which it contacted proactively customers
     every 6 months with the promise to adapt their plan to their actual voice,
     text, and data consumption. Treatment was adapted to customer lifetime
     value: VIP customers were contacted by call centers whereas medium
     value customers received an email and low-value customers a text mes-
     sage. Algorithms were used to develop personalized recommendations
     depending on the customer consumption, ARPU, and other factors.
     For instance, if a customer was paying more than the actual price of
     the plan due to international communications, the company recom-
     mended a more comprehensive (and expensive) plan including interna-
     tional communications. Cross-selling campaigns were also launched to
     equip mobile clients with Internet subscriptions in an attractive “quadru-
     ple play” bundle. This program resulted in a decrease in the ARPU of
     only 10 percent in a year.
          Proactive retention was the most challenging program, since the
     company had a large customer base, hence a high risk of revenue
     attrition. The first step was to categorize the root causes for churn by
     customer segment and to deploy retention actions for each one of them.
     Models were developed to estimate the likelihood to churn by segment.
     The company analyzed the best time to reactivate a client: a customer was
     considered at risk between the three months prior to the end date of her
     subscription and the three following months. For price sensitive clients,
     top churn root causes were related to the price of the plan, in which case
     they were offered to migrate to the low-price offers. Digital high-value
     clients were leaving to buy the most recent smartphone at a significantly
     lower price when they churned to the competition (operators com-
     monly offer large discounts on mobile phones to new customers, in
     order to increase their customer base). The company solved this issue by
     adjusting the smartphones’ prices for premium clients, while decreasing
        Managing Your Customers as a Portfolio to Improve Your Valuation    73

the subsidy rates for lower value clients. Besides, it included a new
feature in its premium offers: one new smartphone for free every year.
While it lost more than 700,000 customers in the first two quarters of
the year, the operator preserved its customer base and reached more than
800,000 net adds (acquisitions minus churns) in the two following quar-
ters. (Source: www.orange.com/en/content/download/10703/237238/
version/5/file/FY+2012+EN+VDEF.pdf; http://satisfait.orange.fr/
maitrise_budget_bilan_conseil_personnalise.php.)

Increase Customer Lifetime Value
for All Customers
Now let’s put all we have learned about customer lifetime value together
in one framework. As a company you don’t just have one customer.
To optimize enterprise value you need to optimize total customer
equity—or the sum total of the lifetime value of all customers.
    An easy way to think about optimizing customer equity is to think
of your customer pool as a physical pool full of water. Think of increas-
ing customer lifetime value across the customer portfolio as increasing
the water level in a pool. The pool is filled with the money spent by the
active customers of your brand. Active customers are those customers
who have spent money with you in the past 12 months. Higher value
customers spend more money and fill the pool up faster than lower value
customers. Water is draining as customers leave you and stop spend-
ing money with you. Some customers are coming back after a hiatus.
How do you increase the water level in your customer pool? You can:
add more (valuable) customers, prevent churn (and value migration),
or reactivate inactive customers. Figure 4.2 summarizes this methodol-
ogy of optimizing customer equity across your portfolio using this pool
cycle analogy.


Add More (Valuable) Customers
You need to add at least as many customers as you lose in a year, prefer-
ably more. Therefore, how many customers you need to acquire in a
given year to at least stay stable depends on your churn rate and on your
rate of value migration. If you lose more customers, or if you lose more
of your valuable customers, you will need to acquire more revenues to
74                    A Complete Predictive Marketing Primer




     Figure 4.2   The Pool Cycle Management Framework

     compensate for this. The opposite is also true. If you can find a way to
     acquire more valuable customers, you don’t need to acquire as many of
     them. We talk about marketing spending optimization in Chapter 5 and
     give examples of specific marketing strategies to acquire more valuable
     customers in Chapter 11.

     Prevent Churn
     When a customer leaves you it may be too late to get him or her back.
     Your chances of gaining a customer for life are much greater if you proac-
     tively reach out to a customer than if you wait for that customer to leave
     you and try to get them back later. We elaborate on strategies to grow
     customer value in Chapter 12.

     Engage Inactive Customers
     When a customer leaves you, not all is lost. On average it is 10 times
     cheaper to reactivate a lapsed customer than it is to acquire a new one.
     Reactivation programs for lapsed customers therefore are a low-hanging
     fruit for marketers looking for new revenue streams. It is even better to
     engage a customer to prevent a customer from lapsing in the first place.
     We focus on programs to retain and reactivate customers in Chapter 13.
PART 2


Nine Easy Plays to
Get Started with
Predictive Marketing




                       75
CHAPTER 5



Play One: Optimize
Your Marketing
Spending Using
Customer Data

O    ptimizing marketing spend is a vast subject to cover on its own.
     However, most of the approaches lack customer behavior and pre-
dictions as their focal point, which leads to media response optimization,
and not true marketing optimization.
     When asked to allocate marketing budgets, most marketers imme-
diately think about allocating budget to the most important sources of
revenues, the best performing channels and the best performing key-
words from a response perspective, ignoring the customer who responds
to marketing. However, we want to introduce a different framework to
think about marketing spending: the predictive marketing way to allo-
cate spending is based on allocating dollars to the right people, rather
than to the right products or channels.
     As we have said in Chapter 4, your most important job as a marketer
is to optimize the lifetime value of every customer, and the customer
equity of your customer base as a whole. Therefore, you need to allocate
your budget by taking customer into account. In this chapter we look at
the following framework when it comes to allocating marketing budget:

                                                                             77
78              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

     • Create separate plans to invest in acquisition, retention, and reactiva-
       tion.
     • Differentiate your spending on high-, medium-, and low-value
       customers.
     • Find the products that bring in the highest lifetime value customers.
     • Find the channels that bring in the highest lifetime value customers.

     Invest in Acquisition, Retention,
     and Reactivation
     To an extent, it is cheaper to reactivate lapsed customers than to acquire
     new customers. It is even cheaper to retain customers than to reactivate
     customers. On average, according to AgilOne data, existing customers
     spend 83 percentage more and visit 60 percentage more often. It is
     therefore critical to be deliberate about retaining customers, such as con-
     verting one-time buyers as quickly as possible to repeat buyers.
          When thinking about allocating your marketing spending, think
     about how to allocate budget to your acquisition, retention, and reac-
     tivation efforts separately. If you can, you may even want to allocate
     different marketing personnel to each of these efforts. Some companies
     are starting to organize around groups of customers and the objective
     to be achieved with each group: acquiring new customers, engaging
     existing customers, and reactivating lapsed customers.
          In our experience, most companies are too focused on acquiring
     new customers when they could achieve growth more cost effectively
     by focusing more on retention and reactivation. Retaining existing cus-
     tomers requires more work but ultimately is more efficient from a cost
     perspective. Predictive marketing is a key enabler, as we outlined in this
     book to engage existing customers.
          Let’s look at the growth numbers of a fictitious company (see
     Figure 5.1). This company is consistent in acquiring new customers:
     it brings in about 175,000 new customers every year. However, every
     year it is getting better at bringing back existing or past customers.
     It brought in business from 266,000 existing customers in 2014,
     a 44 percent increase from the 185,000 existing customers it booked in
     2011. The growth of this company is almost entirely fueled by existing
     customers. This is usually a very good thing, especially because in our
     experience reactivating existing customers is about 10 times cheaper than
         Play One: Optimize Your Marketing Spending Using Customer Data       79




Figure 5.1   Growth from New and Existing Customers


acquiring new ones. So not only is this company growing its top line
revenue, it is also becoming more profitable.
    For the next year, the company can now project growth of its existing
customers (see Figure 5.2). If growth of existing customers continues,
then it may have 305,000 customers buying in 2015. That means it only
needs to acquire 136,000 new customers to achieve the same revenues
next year as it did this year. The numbers used in this example are typical
for the retail industry, and if you are in that industry you can use these
to do your own planning:

• About 40 percent of new customers will come back the next year as
  repeat customers.
• About 70 percent of repeat customers will come back the next year
  as repeat customers.
• Ten percent of past, lapsed customers can be reactivated to return as
  customers in the next year.

   For most companies, acquisition requires 7 to 10 marketing touches
and each touch is three to five times more expensive (due to lower
80                Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing




     Figure 5.2    How Many New Customers Do You Need?

     response rates) than for existing customers. Existing customers require
     only three to five touches. The resulting economics are 10-20 times
     higher costs for customer acquisition than for customer retention.
          Perhaps the most important point here is that every percentage
     improvement in retention has a positive compound effect on growth,
     while acquisition starts from zero year after year and is very costly.
     Continue to focus on improving retention by measuring and improving
     retention over time, improving as compared to your peers, and by
     breaking down retention into its components and improving and
     benchmarking the piece parts. For example, retention by geography or
     by product categories might be very different and offer opportunities
     for improvement.
          If we go back to the company in our example and benchmark them
     against their peers, it may no longer surprise you that they are outper-
     forming their peers when it comes to existing customer growth rate (see
     Figure 5.3). They are, however, lagging slightly when it comes to new
     customer growth. Benchmarking against your peers is a powerful way to
     identify areas of opportunity for your company.
        Play One: Optimize Your Marketing Spending Using Customer Data        81




Figure 5.3   Benchmarking Your Growth

     When you engage in benchmarking, compare each of the customer
life cycle stages separately. For business marketing, this may be measuring
the conversion in each of the stages of the customer funnel. You might
find that you are doing better than average when it comes to converting
prospects and suspects to leads for your company, but that you lag when
it comes to converting leads to trial or first purchase (see Figure 5.4).
     When you decide how much to invest in each of your life cycle
segments, take into consideration that conversion rates for each group
are very different. When advertising to existing customers, you may find
that your conversion rate is 60 percent, whereas perhaps the conversion
rate of advertising to brand-new customers is only 6 percent. This means




Figure 5.4   Engineering the Marketing Funnel
82                Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

     that you should be willing to spend more for a click from an existing
     customer than for a click from a new customer.
           We give a detailed example in figures 5.5 and 5.6. In this example,
     let’s assume you are getting 100 visitors to your website using pay-to-click
     advertising. For every 100 visitors, you are getting 20 new orders. How-
     ever, of these 20 orders, 15 come from existing customers reactivated by
     your campaign and only five orders come from brand-new customers.
           This scenario lines up with what we see across businesses. Most of
     your traffic tends to come from new customers, whereas most of your
     orders come from repeat customers. It may look at first like you are
     getting a 20 percent conversion rate from your campaign, whereas in
     reality you are seeing a blended conversion rate from new and existing
     customers, each with very different economics.
           If you had to spend $0.20 for each click, you would pay $20 for the
     100 visitors to your site or $1 per order. On the surface this campaign is
     making you money because you are making $2 in margin per order, so
     $1 of profit for each order. Because of the difference between new and
     repeat customers, however, the truth is much different.




     Figure 5.5    Marketing Funnel by Life Cycle
           Play One: Optimize Your Marketing Spending Using Customer Data             83

                                                      Average
                   Cost per Marketing        Cost per Margin   VC
                    Click    Spend            Order per Order Margin
            Clicks   ($)       ($)    Orders   ($)      ($)    ($)
Overall       100   $0.2    $20.00    20     $1.00     $2       $1.00
New/           75   $0.2    $15.00     5     $3.00     $2      ($1.00) ←Acquisition
    Prospects                                                            Cost
Existing       25   $0.20    $5.00    15     $0.33     $2       $1.67 ←Net Profit

Figure 5.6     Marketing Spending Optimization Example


     In reality, of the 20 orders received, 15 were from existing customers,
which were reactivated with your marketing campaign, and only five
from brand-new customers. Looking at it this way, it turns out that the
new customer acquisition campaign is actually losing you money in the
short run. Each new customer costs you $3 to acquire and brings in
only $2 per order. This means you are losing $1 on the first transaction
of each new customer. Losing money on acquiring new customers is
not necessarily a bad thing as long as you know what you are doing.
Most marketers are fine losing money on customer acquisition, provided
that the customer has a lifetime value that will make the relationship
positive in the long run. We look at that next.
     Each existing customer is costing you only $0.33 to reactivate and is
making you $1.67 in net profit. That seems pretty good, but perhaps you
could have reactivated this customer with a well-timed email campaign
and avoid the reactivation cost altogether.
     The solution is to do optimization separately for your acquisition
and retention budget. You can optimize your acquisition budget based
on the time it takes to break even or the customer value achieved in the
first 90 days. Optimize your retention budget based on net profit per
order, cutting down on negative net profit activities. For each of these
you can use either actuals from the past or predicted measures for the
breakeven time period.

Optimizing Your Acquisition Budget
We recommend that you optimize your acquisition budget based on pay-
back time or customer value (predicted or actual). Figure 5.7 illustrates
the concepts of payback time and customer value. The payback time is
the period it takes for you to recoup your acquisition spending. Let’s say it
84                Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing




     Figure 5.7    The Customer Value Path



     costs you $5 to acquire a customer and it takes you one month to receive
     enough profit, or customer value, from that customer to recoup that
     investment. The payback time for the customer acquired from this par-
     ticular activity is thus one month. You could rank all your acquisition
     activities based on payback time and pick the best ones.
          The other way to optimize acquisition activities is to choose a time
     period, for example 90 days, and to see which acquisition activities
     lead to the greatest customer value at the end of the evaluation period.
     We picked a relatively short time period here, 90 days, because the acqui-
     sition landscape is very dynamic. Keywords that work one week may not
     work the other week, so looking too far into the future may not lead
     to accurate results. In other words, the acquisition activity that leads to
     great results this year may no longer exist one year later.
         Play One: Optimize Your Marketing Spending Using Customer Data      85

     We recommend that for each of your acquisition efforts, you try
to fill in the payback time and the return on investment (ROI) from
customer value at the end of your evaluation period. You can use the
template in Figure 5.8 to do this. Then simply pick the best performing
activities for next year. Certain considerations go into play, such as the
quantity of customers acquired, the variability over time, and the ability
to invest more.
     Some acquisition sources, such as banner ads on a high-fashion blog,
may have extremely short payback periods and yield a profit on the first
order, but are contributing very few new customers. The marketers goal
is not only to be optimal in the profit sense, but in quantity as well.
Acquisition sources that might be highly efficient might yield only a
few customers, and hence are not impactful. In one case, a blogger was
delivering very valuable customers to a brand, but could only deliver
very few customers with no ability to scale with a larger investment.
     Second, some sources deliver consistent performance over time,
whereas others have more variability. Consistent sources are always
preferred over highly variable ones. Lastly, you should look at your
ability to invest more. Certain marketing investments such as search
engine marketing (SEM) can be increased if performing well, whereas
others might be supply constrained. Therefore, even though a source is
performing, there might not be a chance to invest more in these sources.

Optimize Your Retention Budget
We recommend that you optimize your retention budget based on con-
tribution margin and customer value. After optimizing for acquisition,
marketers need to build profitable relationships with those customers
over time. After a customer has placed her first order, the acquisition
cost is already a “sunk cost.” Therefore, the approach should no longer


Source of           Acquisition       Payback Time            90-Day ROI
Acquisition          Cost ($)            (Days)            (LTV-ACQ/ACQ)
SEM_Yahoo               12                   43                   15%
Banner_FB               19                  123                  −20%
Retargeting_SH          25                   80                    2%

Figure 5.8    Acquisition Sources Worksheet
86                Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

     take the acquisition cost into account, since those customers are already
     paid for and optimized for that cost. This requires careful understanding
     of the variable contribution margin. The variable contribution margin
     is defined as the gross margin minus the marketing cost to generate that
     order. You should perform this calculation for each source of market-
     ing bringing orders from customers placing their second or subsequent
     orders. The contribution margin is going to be different for low-value,
     medium-value, and high-value customers. We look at allocating budget
     to each of these groups of customers next.

     Differentiate Spending Based
     on Customer Value
     Losing a high-value customer is much more costly than losing a low-
     value customer. Therefore, when allocating your retention budget think
     about different value-based segments and how likely they are to buy
     from you again. For this you will need to be able to calculate the
     likelihood to buy for each segment. The customers with a lower likeli-
     hood to buy are at greater risk of leaving you—and never make another
     purchase again.
          You should allocate budget based on customer value and risk.
     We will walk through the example of Figure 5.9. Let’s say you have
     600,000 new customers with an average annual value of $100. In addi-
     tion, your existing customers include 90,000 high-value customers
     that spend an average $400 a year, 540,000 medium-value customers
     that spend an average $110 a year, and 270,000 low-value customers that




     Figure 5.9    Spending Based on Value and Risk
         Play One: Optimize Your Marketing Spending Using Customer Data        87

spend only $20 a year. Losing one of the $400 customers is more costly
than losing a $20 customer.
     The historical retention rate for each of these groups may be different
as well. Perhaps your high-value, loyal customers have a 90 percent reten-
tion rate as compared to a 20 percent retention rate for the low-value,
discount shoppers. If your retention rate drops, you have $32 million
at risk with your high-value customers, $38 million at risk with your
medium-value, and only $1 million at risk with your low-value cus-
tomers. Another way to look at it is that if you can further increase
the retention rate of each group, you have $3.6 million of upside with
high-value customers, $24 million of upside with medium-value cus-
tomers, and $4.3 million of upside with low-value customers. So whereas
the retention rate of high-value customers is high at 90 percent, still
37 percentage of all money at risk due to churn comes from this group.
On the other hand, while the retention rate of your lowest value cus-
tomers is only 20 percentage, only 2 percentage of all money at risk
comes from this group. It would make sense to spend more money to
protect the potential loss of medium- and high-value customers in this
case. We share concrete tips and examples for campaigns to grow and
retain customers in Chapters 12 and 13.

Find Products That Bring High-Value
Customers
Now let’s look at your product portfolio through the lens of customers’
lifetime value. If you simply rank your products based on the revenue
they bring in you may miss important insights. Let’s assume you sell
five different categories of products: category 1 through 5 as shown on
Figure 5.10. Category 1 may bring in 25 percent of your new customer
revenues as compared to only 6 percent for category 5–type products.
However, if you could only look two years into the future, it would be
clear that it is in fact a different product category altogether, category
2 that outperforms all other product types based on customer lifetime
value. Some categories of products may have lower customer revenue in
year one but over time will result in more repeat purchases and higher
customer lifetime revenues. When deciding how much money to invest
in each product category, you should take future revenues into account.
You can also spend more money to acquire category 2 customers because
those have a higher lifetime value over time.
88              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing




     Figure 5.10   Lifetime Value by Acquisition Category



     Find Channels That Bring High-Value
     Customers
     Acquisition channels, too, can be ranked based on the types and value
     of the customers it delivers. Not all channels deliver customers of equal
     value. In one example, a company uses various outlets to acquire new
     subscribers. After 60 days, the customers acquired via the Spa channel
     and those acquired via DailyCandy or AdFusion are about eight times
     more valuable, on average, than those acquired via US Weekly.
          Similarly, when Anne Swift, chief marketing nut at Nuts.com, an
     online retailer of nuts and dried fruits, had to decide how much money
     to spend on specific adwords. She was somewhat reluctant to bid much
     money for certain keywords. However, when she switched from looking
     at just the first order to looking at predicted lifetime value to determine
     profitability of a campaign, she found that many of her bidding strategies
     had been too conservative.
          When Adam Shaffer worked for PCM, a billion-dollar electronics
     distributor, he had to decide which sources to spend on. He initially
     focused on adwords campaigns. However, he found that some of these
     campaigns were acquiring the same customers over and over again.
     Instead of spending one time to acquire a customer, customers were
         Play One: Optimize Your Marketing Spending Using Customer Data      89

searching and clicking paid links each time they came back for a repeat
purchase. These customers were not nearly as profitable as Adam had
initially thought. On the other hand, when Adam looked at his direct
mail campaigns he was pleasantly surprised. Although these campaigns
were very expensive, for certain segments of customers, direct mail was
a very profitable way to reach these high lifetime value customers.
     In another example, we’re working with an online golf retailer to
review the performance of their Google Product Listing Ads (PLA).
On the surface, it appeared that the Taylor Made and Adams PLAs
generated the same number of buyers, with slightly more revenue and
higher margin customers coming from the Adams PLA: Taylor Made and
Adams each brought 67 buyers, with $11,453.18 coming from Adams
and $10,855.01 coming from Taylor Made buyers. So on the surface the
Adams program is the more successful one by a small margin. By look-
ing at the same information by customer order count, we can see that
the Taylor Made PLA acquired 20 new customers and drove 39 incre-
mental orders from existing customers. The Adams PLA, however drove
32 new customers and 26 incremental orders from existing customers.
While Taylor Made drove fewer new acquisitions, it drove acquisition
of highly profitable customers: revenue per new customer was $678.72
and margin $237.44 for each new Taylor Made buyer as compared to
$326.48 in revenue and $174.29 per new customer for Adams. In con-
clusion, the Taylor Made program probably is the more important one
to double down on. Existing customers can be targeted through other
channels such as email, and while there were fewer new customers com-
ing from the Taylor Made program, the overall new customer revenue
and margin from this program outperformed the Adams program by a
significant margin.


The Case for Last-Touch Attribution
The biggest problem when finding channels that perform is that mul-
tiple marketing efforts, in different channels, all assist in the outcome.
The sheer number of available channels, tools, and keywords have
exponentially increased, leading to confusion and frustration from
marketers as to what marketing touch is responsible for what customer
action. For example, a customer clicked on a banner, three days later
searched and came to the website through a Google Adword ad, then
90              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

     one day later, got an email and clicked. In such cases, all these marketing
     touches contribute to the conversion, but in a fractional manner.
     Understanding this fractional contribution is the domain of revenue
     attribution.
          In order to do this, marketers needed to attribute gross margin and
     cost of the specific activity with each marketing touch. It was quite
     easy when touches were fewer and last-touch attribution worked quite
     well. With the advance of keyword advertising, retargeting, and various
     other online campaigns, marketers started to demand more sophisticated
     marketing attribution, such as multitouch attribution. Nowadays, many
     orders are touched by three-plus marketing events, which requires the
     marketer to sort out how much credit to give to each event.
          Multitouch attribution can become complex very quickly, using
     techniques such as linear, time-decay, or time-window–based attribu-
     tion. Each of these methods can be the right solution. For example, linear
     attribution—where each marketing activity gets equal credit—could be
     a good way to give partial credit to customers clicking on advertise-
     ments, but if you are sending them emails, direct mail, that is, outbound
     touches, the more you send the more credit they will get, hence reducing
     the effectiveness of all together.
          There certainly is value in multitouch attribution for considered
     purchase items, such as cars, home goods, insurance, where the buying
     cycle is relatively long and the consumer is being educated and nurtured
     to make the right choice. For short sales cycle, impulse purchases, the
     problem is less important.
          Many marketers obsess over accuracy of such calculations. The right
     approach is to find the attribution approach that is as simple as possible,
     yet accurate enough to sort through good and bad marketing invest-
     ments. Test the following: How does the order of performance change
     between sources when you change attribution methods? If a market-
     ing source is performing poorly, does it all of a sudden perform well
     when you switch from last-touch to linear attribution? Even if you do see
     changes in rank order of sources, the next question to ask is the impor-
     tance of those sources in terms of the budget spent on them and their
     performance in variable contribution margin. If the order changes, but
     those specific channels contribute little in the grand scheme of things,
     then maybe investing in complicated attribution modeling is not worth
     your time after all.
         Play One: Optimize Your Marketing Spending Using Customer Data      91

     In our experience, if you are marketing short decision-cycle products
and services, such as buying a pair of headphones or a laptop case, last-
touch attribution will be perfectly accurate enough. Because the decision
cycle is short, consumers tend to make a decision whether to buy quickly,
not requiring them to come back many times. Therefore, the last-touch
attribution is more than adequate in providing the necessary accuracy
compared to the marketing cost/benefit of using attribution and the cost
of owning and operating a sophisticated attribution system.
     Often the difference between last-touch and multitouch attribution
does not make a good source perform poorly, or a bad source perform
well all of a sudden. Rather the okay performers, or sources that are
more or less zero, will flip-flop. We have tested the difference in rank-
ing between last-touch and multitouch attribution and found only small
differences. In attributed revenues in dollar terms the differences were
less than 10 percent, and often much smaller given any specific channel.
In terms of the rank order of the channels you can see the results of one
such test in Figure 5.11. There were only two instances, both marked
with ∗ in Figure 5.11, where two similarly performing channels were
reversed in order when switching attribution methods.
     One reason that last-touch attribution works so well in many cases
is that the time frame from marketing touch to customer decision has
shrunk from weeks to days, minutes, or even seconds. In the case of direct
mail, consumers typically respond with a purchase within weeks after
receiving the catalog. Catalog marketers call this the matchback or back-
match period. For most catalog campaigns, within four weeks 55 percent
of all responses have come in. After eight weeks 85 percent of responses

              Last touch attribution   Multi-touch attribution
               1.   Email               1.   Email
               2.   Yahoo ads           2.   Yahoo ads
               3.   Adwords             3.   Adwords
              ∗4.   CJ                 ∗4.   Direct mail
              ∗5.   Direct mail        ∗5.   CJ
               6.   Performics          6.   Performics
               7.   Amazon              7.   Amazon
              ∗8.   FCBI               ∗8.   Skymall
              ∗9.   Skymall            ∗9.   FCBI

Figure 5.11   Last-Touch versus Multitouch Attribution
92             Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

     have come in and after 12 weeks 99 percent of responses have come in.
     Given this, most marketers would use four weeks as their matchback
     window and only attribute responses that come in within the first four
     weeks to the direct mail campaign.
         Modern marketing campaigns have much shorter matchback win-
     dows than direct mail campaigns. The timescales in digital marketing
     tend to be days instead of weeks. This is why last-touch attribution
     works well for digital campaigns because the customer action happens
     so quickly after the campaign. Using last-touch attribution can make
     finding the channels that bring the best customers significantly easier
     and attainable for all marketers, even those who have not invested in
     sophisticated marketing attribution solutions.
CHAPTER 6



Play Two: Predict
Customer Personas
and Make Marketing
Relevant Again

A    s we saw in Chapter 2, clustering is the automated, machine-learning
     powered version of segmentation. Clustering is a powerful tool that
allows us to discover personas or communities within your customer
base. You segment customers to identify homogeneous groups that
exist within your customer base, which can be used to optimize and
differentiate marketing actions or product strategy.
     An online retailer we work with is operating an e-commerce store
where triathletes, hobbyists, and cyclists can celebrate and support their
passions. The company wanted to cater to individual customer interests
in a scalable and feasible way for its modest marketing team. It began
by looking at the different personas that make up its customers and dis-
covered certain distinct communities around its products: professional
remote control racecar drivers; hobbyists building kits with their chil-
dren; and remote control airplane enthusiasts. With this information,
the company started to send out different newsletters to the different
personas. Addressing each of these groups with meaningful personal-
ized content immediately paid off: email click rates increased 66 percent.

                                                                             93
94              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

     This is very typical, as we have seen similar increases in response with
     many companies we work with.
          Clustering is a means to an end and it is a tool to develop strategies.
     Strategy informs segmentation and not the other way around. The
     three example schemas we chose here are customer behavior around
     products, their shopping behavior, and their attitudes against various
     brands. Other schemas would depend on the business strategy you’re
     trying to develop. Just like we’re clustering customers, you could cluster
     keywords, products, stores, employees, and any other entity in your
     marketing ecosystem. For example one of our customers, Arcelik, a
     white goods and electronics manufacturer and retailer in Europe, wanted
     to improve store performance and understand the customer profile of
     its stores. Head of CRM efforts Bora Cetiner with direction from their
     VP of Marketing Tulin Karabuk clustered their stores and understood
     what made them different. Equipped with this, they were able to make
     changes to store layout, advertising, CRM efforts. Even the goals set
     for each store depended on which cluster they belonged to.
          When you utilize clustering for customers, we call the outcome clus-
     ters personas, because it captures the underlying persona for the customer
     that belongs to that cluster. But how do you express personas in a way
     that the marketer can understand the persona? The easiest way to do
     this is using the same heuristics of how we humans do this. Humans
     are essentially difference engines that look for “edges” to detect a pic-
     ture or highs and lows that are different and keep only this information.
     For example when we look at a landscape, we notice the horizon, the
     sun setting, and we don’t pay attention to all the waves in the ocean.
     We use similar mechanism to display personas, and we express a cluster
     “DNA” to do this. Cluster DNA is not an industry standard term (yet),
     but we use it to describe the clusters to marketers. Cluster DNA depicts
     how a customer belonging to a specific cluster more or less likely prefers
     a product or behavior (or whatever the clustering schema is) versus any
     other one.


     Types of Clusters
     Let’s look deeper into the three types of personas that we will use
     as our examples: Product-based clusters, brand-based clusters, and
     behavior-based clusters. These are three examples that we utilize on a
     frequent basis and informs a wide variety of strategies.
      Play Two: Predict Customer Personas and Make Marketing Relevant Again       95

Product-Based Clusters
Product-based clustering models group customers based on what types
or categories of products they tend to prefer and what types of products
customers tend to buy together. Product-based cluster models are some-
times also called category-based clusters. A product cluster can be broad or
very specific. In Figure 6.1 you can see people in one customer segment
tend to only buy sweaters, whereas those in another customer segment
buy different types of active wear. These people might buy swimwear
and watches, but never kids’ clothes, intimates, or jewelry. This is useful
information when deciding which product offers or email content to
send to each of these types of customers.
    How could you use product clusters? A big sports retailer, which sells
athletic gear and apparel across different sports to a range of ages, initially
thought that the same female customers that were buying kids’ soccer
gear were also buying yoga clothes for themselves. The company began
sending direct mail advertising yoga gear to the women who bought soc-
cer products. However, when we ran our predictive clustering models,
we quickly discovered there was no crossover between soccer moms and
yoga moms at all. We found crossover shoppers in different categories at
a much higher rate, which allowed the business to shift its focus away
from marketing to what they thought were soccer and yoga moms to
the newly discovered and much more qualified segment of soccer and
baseball moms.

Brand-Based Clusters
Brand-based clusters tell you what brands people are most likely to
buy. It groups customers together that prefer a group of brands more
than other. For instance, you will be able to identify which customers
are likely to be interested when a specific brand releases new products.
The models can also offer broader insights into related brands that may
be of interest to a customer by comparing her preference to an existing
brand cluster. The results of the model in Figure 6.2 illustrate that
customers who like Tahari by ASL also tend to like Calvin Klein and
Nine West, but would not be interested at all in Desigual or 6126.
    Many retailers we work with have discovered that the brand affin-
ity of customers tends to be stronger than their product-type affinity.
This means that if a marketer in the example of Figure 6.2 sends a
promotion of Nine West shoes to a customer who has bought a lot of
96                Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing




     Figure 6.1    Example of Product-Based Clusters


     Calvin Klein in the past, this promotion will likely generate a lot of sales.
     It will probably generate more sales than a campaign that is promoting
     watches to people who belong to the active wear cluster and have bought
     a lot of sunglasses in the past. This is a generalization and it is important
     to note that there are exceptions to every rule. This type of affinity is a
      Play Two: Predict Customer Personas and Make Marketing Relevant Again      97




Figure 6.2   Example of Brand-Based Clusters

broader stroke affinity uncovering larger-scale patterns in your customer
base than product recommendations we will cover later.

Behavior-Based Clusters
A behavior-based clustering model groups customers based on how they
will behave while purchasing: Do they use the website or the call cen-
ter? Are they discount addicts? How frequently do they buy? How much
do they spend? How much time will pass before they purchase again?
This algorithm helps set the right tone for contacting the customer.
For instance, customers who only buy with heavy discounts may be
great targets for inventory-clearing sales, whereas customers who typi-
cally pay full price would be better targets for a sneak-peek promotion
of a new product line.
     Behavior-based clustering can help identify completely new clusters
you didn’t know you had before. A clustering algorithm looks at a large
number of variables including, but not limited to, average order size, days
between orders, first order revenue, order variety, discount sensitivity,
order frequency, total number of items purchased, total number of orders
placed, number of returns, products bought in the first order, and order
seasonality. Algorithms can look at hundreds of variables at the same time
and discover which variables and attributes actually matter. Typically a
clustering algorithm will find six to eight statistically significant personas
in your customer data.
     Every behavior-based cluster will have a cluster DNA that will reveal
to the marketer which customer attributes are most differentiating and
relevant in order to group customers. Algorithms are able to segment
customers based on many more variables than a human being could. An
98                Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

     algorithm will start with hundreds of dimensions and finally may pick 20
     or so to define a certain behavioral cluster or persona. The example in
     Figure 6.3 shows some of the factors that could make up a cluster’s DNA.
          Let’s look at an example from business marketing. Let’s assume you
     are selling tools to small homebuilders and contractors. Your behavior-
     based clusters could reveal that you have some customers who only
     purchase from your call center agents, but always after spending a con-
     siderable amount of time doing research online. You may have another
     cluster with customers who stock up only once a year in your store,
     after receiving your direct mail postcard announcing your annual sale.
     And you have a third cluster, which also buy in your store, but basically
     come in once a week and always buy full price. Your marketing strategies
     for each of these three clusters would be very different. If you had only
     one customer behaving in this way, it would not be a cluster and not
     worth building a strategy around. However, the whole idea of clusters is
     that there is a statistically significant group of customers who behave in
     the same way.




     Figure 6.3    Example of Behavior-Based Clusters
      Play Two: Predict Customer Personas and Make Marketing Relevant Again      99

     Airlines’ behavior-based clusters take into account factors like order
frequency, days between orders, order seasonality, and discount sensitivity
to help differentiate business travelers from leisure travelers. For airlines,
this is a critical segmentation tool. Pricing and promotional strategies,
as well as customer service strategies, can now be differentiated and
tuned based on the types of customers being served on certain routes
and flights.
     Retailers might encounter behavior-based clusters such as full-price
infrequent buyers, buyers who return products frequently (the so-called
“returnaholics”), buyers with few orders who mainly buy when there is
a large discount (the “discount junkies”), and buyers with a high order
frequency who are very likely also your VIP customers. These differ-
ent customer groups will be attracted to very different promotions.
Your whales might enjoy receiving frequent emails from you and will
purchase almost every time. However, sending the same email and con-
tent to your full-price infrequent buyers may turn them off to the point
that they opt out from your email list. You might be better off sending
this group a postcard if and when you are releasing a new product.

Using Clusters to Improve
Customer Acquisition
Clusters are not only useful to target existing customers with more rel-
evant communications. Clusters can also be used to craft more rele-
vant new customer acquisition campaigns. Everything from the creative
design to the places you advertise is influenced by the persona you are
looking to target and acquire. The better you understand the different
customer personas that buy from you, the more accurate you can be in
designing campaigns to attract more buyers just like it.
     A leading vitamin and wellness brand used to collect data, like statis-
tics on the best-selling products, and analyze it around the boardroom
to make hypotheses about their business. For example, when a certain
joint supplement became a big seller, they assumed it was because of an
uptick in their senior-aged customer base. They leveraged this hypothesis
to tailor their campaign artwork, print mailers, and their media ads to an
elderly customer. However, when they started to apply predictive clus-
tering models to their data, clustering instead showed that the increase in
joint supplements was actually due to a completely different customer:
100              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      customers that identified as body builders. Imagine how this impacted
      their business decisions! To start, the brand’s marketing agency made
      a swift change to the artwork and media plan to save the resources that
      would have been wasted marketing to an elderly customer. The company
      can now work with its digital agency to make better product recommen-
      dations on e-commerce, as well as develop lifestyle content around this
      audience that is highly relevant to them for the blog and social channels.
      The brand’s store planners can merchandise the joint supplement along-
      side the protein powder in-store. Its PR firm can plan a highly targeted
      event and bring in the right influencers.
          Clusters can also be used successfully in combination with lookalike
      targeting on social media and in display advertising. We will discuss this
      use case in more detail in Chapter 11.


      Things to Watch Out for When Using Clusters
      The biggest mistake that marketers make when it comes to segmenta-
      tion is to use only one-dimensional segmentation. No person belongs
      to only one segment. Segmentation is very contextual. Depending on
      the situation, a customer belongs to a different segment. For example,
      from a product perspective, John could be a runner and Mary could
      be a swimmer, but John could also be a discount-sensitive buyer always
      hunting for deals from a behavioral perspective and Mary always buys the
      latest product when it first comes out at full price. Now these are two
      dimensions that we can segment on that cannot be combined in a single
      dimensional way because another customer, Jane, could be a swimmer
      and discount-sensitive as well.
           It is also important to find a way to update and use clusters on an
      ongoing basis. Many companies spend a lot of time creating the perfect
      clustering algorithm, performing exhaustive analysis whereby to select
      the cluster that would bring the most value or action-ability. Building
      a cluster this way can easily cost $100,000 or more. What’s worse, by
      the time the analysis is complete and in the hands of marketing, the
      information in the customer file is ancient history. Paying continually
      for re-scoring a customer file on a quarterly (monthly usually is cost
      prohibitive) basis is expensive and still leads to sub-optimal results. These
      days, there is a better way, and modern software can ensure that clusters
      are updated and ready to use on a daily basis.
     Play Two: Predict Customer Personas and Make Marketing Relevant Again    101

Clusters in Action
A global manufacturer and distributor of high-quality vitamins and
nutritional supplements works to enhance the well-being of its cus-
tomers by delivering high-quality, best-value nutritional supplements
and wellness products. The retailer’s European operations, which have
more than 1,000 stores, wanted to gain a deep understanding of both
online and brick-and-mortar store transactions. In particular, the retailer
wanted to learn which products customers buy, how frequently they buy,
and how discounts motivate them to buy. They focused on what buyer
behaviors are driving the business, tailoring email campaigns accordingly.
The retailer learned that the most valuable shoppers, which account for
only 20 percent of its customer base, drove more than 80 percent of its
profit. It also learned that food drives customer frequency and attracts
these high-value shoppers. Certain food lines were considered unprof-
itable before understanding this insight. Now the retailer continues
to carry these products to encourage customer frequency and attract
high-value shoppers.
     The company also learned that the purchase frequency of most of its
customers is very low. However, loyal customers will shop more often
and spend about 30 percent more per transaction. Also, customers who
buy the store magazine spend 50 percent more than those who don’t get
the magazine.
     The insights helped the company make adjustments to its merchan-
dising and marketing plans, increasing overall revenue by 1.5 percent
and the revenue of a specific new product announcements by 4 percent.
It was also able to record a rise in the number of customers, the aver-
age order value, the average transaction value, and number of units per
shopping cart.
     The most innovative and impactful use of clustering is always start-
ing with the end in mind. Define and understand the problem you’re
trying to solve or strategy you’re trying to develop, then find the most
appropriate clustering schema that will help you tease apart personas to
work with.
CHAPTER 7



Play Three: Predict the
Customer Journey for
Life Cycle Marketing

I n Chapter 4 we recommended that you look to optimize the lifetime
  value of each customer. In this chapter we look at the life cycle of a
single customer in more detail to see how our strategy should include
all stages of customer life cycle from acquisition to growth to retention.
We start by looking at a simple customer life cycle or customer journey
and then see how segmenting customers based on their life cycle stage
can yield great insights and opportunities for customer growth. We also
give you an overview of life cycle marketing strategies.

The Customer Value Journey
The basic principle of optimizing customer lifetime value is the same
for all stages of the life cycle and can be summarized in three words:
give to get. Customers are much more likely to buy from you if they
have a relationship with you. The best way to develop that relationship
is to deliver an experience of value. So to get customer (lifetime) value,
give customer value.
     Figure 7.1 shows basic concepts of the customer value journey.
Customers will disengage you if they are not getting value from the
relationship. The definition of value is very different from company

                                                                             103
104                Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing




      Figure 7.1    The Customer Value Journey


      to company and it ranges from monetary value, especially in business
      marketing, to utilitarian value such as when using a great vacuum
      cleaner, to the self-confidence you may feel when wearing a designer
      dress. Whatever your definition of value, if customers are not getting it,
      they will look elsewhere.
           There are three basic forces at work to create a relationship with a
      customer. First, does it make sense for the business to have a relationship
      with the customer, which requires thinking through size and type of
      transaction, future revenue streams, cross-sell, upsell opportunities, and
      cost of acquisition? Basically, will this customer deliver enough economic
      value to the business over time? Second, you need to think through
      whether it makes sense for the customer to have a relationship with you;
      this includes emotional attachment, risk of decision, follow-on products,
         Play Three: Predict the Customer Journey for Life Cycle Marketing     105

or services required, involvement with the product, and so on. Basically,
does our business offer what the customer is seeking? Third, to develop a
relationship with a customer requires the business conditions to be right
for the life cycle marketing to work. You need to be able to configure
customer experience at a granular level and have the data to understand
and predict customer behavior.
     It is easier for companies selling certain products to develop a rela-
tionship with its customers than for others. For example, it is really hard
for a deodorant brand to enable a life cycle relationship with a customer.
Typically deodorant simply is not a high-engagement, high-risk product
that makes sense for the consumer to provide information about and get
something in return. On the other hand, for a camera brand or retailer,
building a relationship with its customers is a lot easier. The camera buyer
will engage with the brand starting from a camera purchase, continue to
stay engaged with the brand for additional accessories, training videos,
workshops, repairs, and so on. In this example, it really makes sense for
both the business and the consumer to engage in a relationship, where
it potentially benefits both and the business conditions are ripe to do so.
     There are exceptions to every rule. For example, Secret is an
antiperspirant/deodorant for women manufactured by Procter &
Gamble (P&G) and first launched in 1956. In 2010 P&G launched
the anti-bullying campaign “Mean Stinks” around the Secret brand.
This campaign, now in its fifth year, has consistently drawn high engage-
ment on social media and managed to really engage girls with the brand
in a meaningful way.


First Value
As Confucius said: “Every journey starts with the first step,” and this is
true for the customer value journey as well. The first step in every cus-
tomer journey is to get your prospective buyers to first value. We some-
times call this the “first wow.” First value may occur after somebody has
bought from you, but it is even better to try and get your prospects to
first value before they have paid you a penny. This is truly “give to get”
marketing.
     Consider the many ways in which you can deliver value before
somebody is technically a customer. In consumer marketing, you may
be able to expose consumers to your brand via a great advertising
106               Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      campaign, viral marketing campaign, or other piece of content. Perhaps
      prospects first learn about your clothing line from your fashion blog or
      attend an enjoyable fashion show. Many yoga enthusiasts and runners
      first learn about active wear retailer Lululemon from the yoga classes
      and runs it offers at its stores. Marketers of time-share apartments are
      masters of designing first value experiences in the form of free events at
      exotic locations.
           Dominique’s daughter was recruited to a competitive soccer team
      using the “give to get” approach. While her parents had no intention
      of signing her up for such a time- and money-consuming activity, the
      club was smart and invited her daughter to participate in a free soccer
      clinic. From there she was invited to join the training of the team for a
      couple of weeks. Before long, she had made some great friends and was
      begging her mother to join the team. This is more than five years ago,
      and she is still playing (and her mom still paying).
           Consumer goods companies have been using samples for a long
      time to get you to experience their product before buying it. The food
      sampling at warehouse club Costco is a popular pastime for many fami-
      lies. Retail companies are increasingly considering themselves content or
      entertainment companies first and retail companies second. Some retail
      CEOs even refer to themselves as editors-in-chief. The content is free,
      but the clothes are not.
           Other brands are taking “give to get” very literally and engage in
      cause marketing. The Burlington Coat Factory partners with K.I.D.S/
      Fashion Delivers, an organization that donates clothing and other prod-
      ucts to underprivileged families across America. Every store opening is
      celebrated with a coat drive, making a charity event the first experience
      a prospective shopper has with Burlington Coat Factory.
           There are plenty of examples in business marketing as well. When we
      were contemplating hiring a consultant, he first invited us to a free sem-
      inar, then offered a free one-hour consultation. He then sold us to a
      full group class and we eventually signed up for his services. Many busi-
      ness and consumer software companies now offer a free trial period or a
      freemium version of their software. Both allow prospects to use the fully
      or partially featured product for a period of time before committing to a
      purchase. When offering a free trial period, make sure customers reach
      first value before the end of the trial period. Again, the definition of first
         Play Three: Predict the Customer Journey for Life Cycle Marketing      107

value is different for each company. If you are selling quality assurance
test software, perhaps first value is defining your first test that runs with
at least two different device types. If you sell marketing automation soft-
ware, perhaps it is your customer launching her first successful campaign.


Recurring Value
But getting customers to first value is not enough to retain these cus-
tomers long term. A single action does not a habit make. In retail mar-
keting, we find that 70 percent of first-time buyers never come back.
Perhaps they did not have a good experience or, more likely, they simply
forgot about you. The same is true for many business products, includ-
ing software. There usually is a honeymoon period just after purchase
where users are very excited about trying out a new product or tool.
However, if using the new software does not become a habit within the
first months, much of business software ends up as “shelfware.” Shelfware
is software that was paid for but never used.
     It is not always apparent that companies have lost these customers.
If you are a magazine, you may only discover your subscribers have
stopped reading your magazine when it comes time to renew. However,
by then it is too late to create a habit of reading your publication.
The same is true for other products.
     In retail, customers are usually not considered lost or lapsed until
one year after their first purchases. However, our research shows that for
most products, if a repeat purchase does not happen within the first few
months it probably will never happen. This window of recurring value
is different for each company. If you are selling cars, the repurchase time
frame could be years. If you are selling pet food, it is probably a month
or less. In flash sales on fashion sites, it is weeks.
     Whatever the length of the honeymoon period, just after a cus-
tomer’s first value experience with your brand, you have a lot of goodwill
and an unique opportunity to convert this customer from a one-time
buyer to a repeat buyer. Your job is now to deliver recurring value.
     If you get a retail customer to buy a second time, the churn rate drops
from 70 percent to 30 percent. In other words, whereas only 30 percent
of one-time buyers come back to buy again, a whopping 70 percent of
second-time buyers will return for another purchase.
108              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

           Predictive algorithms help predict the repurchase window for your
      company. They can help you drill down to predict the repurchase
      window by clusters or by individual customer.
           Let’s say that you determined the honeymoon period for your com-
      pany is two months and if a second purchase does not occur after two
      months, it will likely not happen. There are a couple of actions you can
      take with this information.
           First, provide helpful information to the customer immediately after
      the first purchase and offer a thank you note for the initial purchase.
      This is also a good time to make recommendations for what the customer
      might want to purchase next. We speak more about recommendations
      in Chapter 10.
           Second, if your product is something that is typically replaced peri-
      odically, such as face cream, water filters, or pet medications, send a
      friendly reminder a week or more before their supply is likely to run
      out. Most customers will find value in the reminder itself: They will
      consider it good customer service that you send this reminder. Waking
      up one morning to discover that you ran out of face cream or pet food
      is no fun, so a courtesy reminder is very welcome to most consumers.
           If after 60 days no repeat purchase has occurred, it is time to step up
      your game. You have nothing to lose at this point, so you might want to
      consider creating additional incentives to get the customer to buy again.
           In business marketing, you similarly want to see recurring use of
      your product within the first months after purchase. For instance, if you
      are selling marketing automation software, you want to see customers
      set up a second and third campaign or landing page shortly after their
      first. Declining usage or nonusage is a sure sign your customer may not
      renew at the end of their subscription period.


      New Value
      Even recurring value and repeat purchases are not the end of the cus-
      tomer journey. If you have established a good pattern of recurring value,
      you may not lose this customer any time soon, but you are still leaving
      value on the table.
           In Chapter 5 we talked about the difference between predicted life-
      time value and upside lifetime value. Predicted lifetime value accounts
      for the future revenues you can expect from customers if they continue
         Play Three: Predict the Customer Journey for Life Cycle Marketing     109

to buy from you, as they do now. We gave the example of a customer
buying hockey tape from a sports store and the retailer trying to market
complimentary products to her that she is currently buying elsewhere in
order to capture new value.
    If a customer is already going to the Disney theme parks every year,
new value for Disney would be to get her to go on a Disney cruise vaca-
tion next. In business marketing, new value means getting customers
to pay for more features of the same product, or buying more products
from the same vendor. In our marketing automation example, new value
could be going beyond installing simple email campaigns and configur-
ing on-site personalization. If you are not experiencing the full value that
a product or vendor has to offer, your chances of churn are higher. On
many of our customer studies, we’ve found that given everything else
being equal, customers with the higher number of categories or dis-
tinct products used, have higher future value. Engagement over multiple
products is a strong indicator of future value.


Life Cycle Marketing Strategies
Now let’s look at some high-level strategies to give customer value in
order to get customer value. Figure 7.2 gives you an overview of life
cycle marketing strategies. We will discuss these strategies at a high level
in this chapter. For details on specific campaigns, read Chapters 11, 12,
and 13.


Prospective Customer Strategies: Can We Help?
We have described many examples of what first value could mean for
prospective customers. Whatever it is for your business, experiment with
different ideas and measure the results. Measuring results also means lis-
tening to your non-buyers. Perform an exit poll on your website, or
institute loss interviews for all lost deals in business marketing. Monitor
your prospects in whichever way you can. Using the behavioral data
such as email signups, form fills, web browsing behavior, keywords used,
marketers need to predict and trigger campaigns to prospect to con-
vert efficiently to become customers. Campaigns based on behavioral
data make the experience personal and increase conversions significantly.
For example, a prospect who searched for “red shoes” on the website after
110                   Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      Life Cycle                               Marketing          Marketing
      Segment           Definition             Objective          Strategy
      Prospective       Somebody who has       Get the prospect Deliver first value or first
         customer         never bought            to convert to    wow.
                          from you before.        a paying
                                                  customer.
      New customer A brand new                 Get your new     Welcome new customers, get
                      customer within             customer to      customers to recurring
                      the first 90 days           come back        value. Understand why
                      of her first                soon and buy     they became a customer
                      purchase.                   again.           and whether and how they
                                                                   are different from existing
                                                                   customers.
      Repeat/active     Somebody who has       Keep these       Continue to delight,
        customer          bought at least         customers        introduce new value. Find
                          twice from you.         engaged, get     ways to encourage them to
                                                  them to refer    refer friends. Introduce
                                                  others.          these customers to new
                                                                   categories or services that
                                                                   they haven’t engaged with
                                                                   yet.
      At-risk/          Hasn’t bought          Reengage these Investigate satisfaction; give a
         Inactive         (or used) product       customers.       reason to try again.
         customer         or service for 90
                          days or not highly
                          likely to buy.
      Lapsed            Haven’t bought in a    Reactivate these   Give a reason to try again.
         customers        year, or very low      customers.
                          likelihood to buy

      Figure 7.2       Overview of Life Cycle Marketing Strategies

      signing up for the email newsletter should get best sellers in red shoes.
      These triggered campaigns are highly relevant and therefore effective.
          Zendesk, a provider of cloud-based helpdesk software, generated
      most of its new business through a free self-service trial. Because
      Zendesk doesn’t speak to its prospects in person during the buying
      process, it decided to monitor exactly what features free-trial users
      touched. Using this information, it was able to identify which parts of
      the software customers were not using and reengineer the onboarding
      process. These changes resulted in a more than 100 percent increase in
      engagement during the trial period.
         Play Three: Predict the Customer Journey for Life Cycle Marketing     111

     It is also important to be helpful during the buying process.
Many customers come into Apple retail stores with no intent to buy.
Once children begin playing with free games and adults start experi-
menting with new phones and computers, it’s only a matter of time
before store associates ask customers how they can help. Before long,
a customer might ask about the cost of upgrading a phone and a sale
might ensue.
     The same can be done with digital marketing. If you see that people
are visiting your website but not completing a purchase, stretch out a
helpful hand. The digital equivalent of “can we help” could be an online
chat box, a pop-up, or a friendly reminder after visitors have already
left your site. We speak more about remarketing campaigns such as cart
abandonment, email, or display retargeting in Chapter 11.
     In business marketing, you may want to pick up the phone and call
a prospect with a simple “can I help.”


New Customer Strategies: Thank You
We have established that if you don’t convert the one-time buyer quickly,
you won’t ever convert that customer. So the actions you take in the
first days, weeks, and months after you have acquired a new customer
are extremely important. A good place to start with new customers is a
simple thank you.
     Nonprofits are masters at sending thank you letters. By including
information about the donation’s impact, nonprofits make the donor
feel good and ensure future donations. The SmileTrain is a nonprofit
that funds cleft lip operations in developing countries. When you
donate to the SmileTrain, the organization responds by sending before
and after pictures of a child who was physically transformed through
your donation.
     So few companies do a good job at a proper thank you that it is
easy to stand out and make a big impression. When you order from
Moosejaw, a retailer that sells outdoor gear and apparel, your order arrives
in a box with a sticker that says: “Sealed with a kiss by: Matt” and the
hand-written name of the packer who closed your box. You can find
many pictures online of customers who were so impressed by this gesture
that they posted praise about it online. The boxes also come with other
stickers such as “No knife. Use teeth.” and “Don’t be surprised if you
112              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      have seen this box before. We recycle.” Moosejaw’s CMO Dan Pingree
      says this allows the company to deliver customer experiences that people
      remember, not just products or transactions.
           After your thank you, make sure to provide new customers with
      helpful hints on how to use or maintain their new products. This could
      be a list of tips on how to use, wash, or maintain the product. Perhaps
      a customer service representative could even pick up the phone and ask
      the customer if everything is okay with a first purchase.
           We have found the same is true in business marketing. If a customer
      experiences problems with your product, nothing is more powerful than
      a customer service representative reaching out proactively. If you know
      your product is difficult to use, perhaps offer customers a free course or
      regular phone calls with a customer service representative.
           Beyond getting customers to use your product or to come back and
      buy more, postpurchase is also a good time to make upsell or next-sell
      recommendations. Home improvement stores found that shortly after
      customers bought wood to build a deck, they were in the market for
      a new barbeque or grill. And shortly after customers bought a new
      wood-pellet grill, they typically would buy grill accessories, a grill cook-
      book, and refill wood pellets. Predictive analytics can help you find these
      correlated products and help you make the customer journey in greater
      detail. Once you know what products are usually bought next, you can
      send customers recommendations proactively.
           If you fail to convert a customer during the honeymoon period,
      don’t give up. Instead, step it up. You have nothing to lose so you might
      as well provide a more aggressive offer. The longer you wait, the lower
      your chances of bringing the customer back. You still have a much better
      chance than to wait for the customer to lapse.


      Repeat/Active Customer Strategies: We Love You
      There is a popular misconception that if customers are actively using
      your product or service and coming back to buy time and time again that
      you should leave them alone. Nothing could be further from the truth.
      There is still much to lose and to gain from these customers. You always
      want to stay top of mind with customers. There are so many brands out
      there that it is easy to be forgotten. Once out of sight, it is likely that
      your brand will also be out of mind. Plus, repeat customers often still
         Play Three: Predict the Customer Journey for Life Cycle Marketing   113

have upside lifetime value if you can get them to buy other products
from you. If nothing else, repeat customers are also prime candidates to
become brand ambassadors for your brand and to refer their friends.
     A simple campaign to appreciate your best customers can be power-
ful. For instance, when LinkedIn reached 200 million users, the company
sent an email to its top 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent most-viewed
profiles in different geographies. Many of the top users proudly posted
the digital letter they received online, and the simple gesture became one
of the biggest viral marketing campaigns in LinkedIn’s history.
     Likewise, in the early years of Amazon, the e-commerce retailer
sent coffee mugs to loyal customers around the Christmas holidays.
We received such a mug and 15 years later remember it well enough to
write about it in this book!
     For repeat customers within customer life cycle management, cre-
ating treatment strategies would involve understanding customers from
a value, behavior, engagement, product, and brand perspectives, similar
to what we outlined in the chapter where we discussed clustering.


Inactive Customer Strategies: Remember Me
Don’t give up on inactive customers. Just because they haven’t bought
anything for a while doesn’t mean they won’t ever buy anything from
you. The first thing to do is to investigate if there is a specific rea-
son why this customer stopped buying or using your product or ser-
vice. You can do this by picking up the phone or via an email survey.
Don’t make assumptions. One vendor we do business with was trying to
be ultra customer-centric by proactively unsubscribing consumers from
their email list if they hadn’t opened these emails for a while. Many cus-
tomers who were unsubscribed automatically were upset. Even though
they hadn’t bought for a while, many said they still enjoyed reading the
newsletter and had every intention of buying again.
    The sooner you act on inactive customers, the better. Don’t wait for
them to lapse. Offer constant gentle reminders of the great past expe-
riences they have had with your brand and provide a gentle nudge to
come back again. Just like a simple “thank you” and “can I help” goes a
long way, a simple reminder can work wonders for inactive customers.
    Music app Shazam found the best way to re-engage subscribers
that hadn’t logged into the service for a while was to send personalized
114              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      recommendations for songs or concerts via email or mobile push
      notifications.
          If recommendations don’t work, send reminders with a simple
      “we miss you” and start to give your customers specific reasons to
      come back. For consumers, perhaps a discount will get them to buy
      again. For businesses, perhaps you offer up a free tune-up or training.
      The messaging and offers for inactive customers and lapsed customers
      are very similar, but you should increase the value of the offers as time
      goes on. It will become more and more difficult to convince customers
      to come back.
          You should take into account the personalized repurchase window
      when doing this. Certain products have a longer time between two pur-
      chases, and certain customers have a longer time between purchases.
      No point to remind me every month to come back if you know from
      my past behavior that I am the type of shopper who comes just twice a
      year to stock up.

      Lapsed Customer Strategies: We Miss You
      Lapsed customers are those that haven’t bought for more than a year or
      those that let their subscription or service lapse. Here the guiding light is
      “what have we got to lose?” These customers may or may not respond
      to your emails, but there is a greater chance than with inactive customers
      that they are tuning out your communications. A strong offer is more
      important here than personalized recommendations and reminders.
           Whereas most of the strategies of reminders, escalating offers of help
      and reasons to come back, and simple “I miss you” still apply for this
      customer segment, you may need to try different channels to reach these
      customers. If a customer hasn’t opened an email from you for a year,
      it doesn’t help to continue to send emails. Instead, you may want to
      try direct mail or Facebook custom audiences advertising to reach these
      customers. Perhaps the customer will actually look at the postcard offer
      and be inspired to return to your store.
           PetCareRx sent postcards to reactivate lapsed customers. Postcards
      are expensive so they only sent these to customers with a relatively high
      likelihood to buy. Also, the incentive for coming back to PetCareRx was
      different for customers with different lifetime values. Those with higher
      lifetime values received a greater discount on their next order.
CHAPTER 8



Play Four: Predict
Customer Value and
Value-Based Marketing

T   he days of one-size-fits-all customer service are long gone.
    Not all customers are going to be as valuable to you as others.
For instance, the costs incurred from customers who frequently return
things they purchase could outweigh the revenue from those customers.
In Chapter 4 we defined customer lifetime value in detail. In this chapter
we look at strategies to segment and target customers by their lifetime
values, a practice called value-based marketing.


Value-Based Marketing
Any business will have those low-value customers, as well as medium
and high-value customers. The trick is identifying which customers fit
into which value buckets and crafting differentiated marketing and ser-
vice strategies based on the value of each customer. That means keeping
perks like unlimited free shipping and returns for high-value customers,
rather than the low-value heavy returners.




                                                                             115
116                Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

         Figure 8.1 summarizes the three key strategies depending on cus-
      tomer value:

      • High-value customers: Spend money to appreciate and retain these
        customers. Pay close attention to retention metrics here.
      • Medium-value customers: Upsell to migrate these customers to max-
        imize their potential. Pay close attention to upside potential of these
        customers.
      • Low-value customers: Reduce your costs of servicing unprofitable
        customers.

           For simplicity purposes we broke down the customers into three
      segments, high, medium, and low value. We usually designate the top
      10 percent of customers as ‘VIP customers’, since there should be very
      few VIP customers to pay attention to, the next 60 percent of customers
      as ‘average’ and the bottom 30 percent as ‘low profitability’ customers.
      This is easily done by ordering customers from highest to lowest revenue
      or profitability and choosing the top 10 percent, the next 60 percent,
      and the lowest 30 percent. The reason why we don’t do this based on an
      absolute revenue or profitability break (for example, all customers who
      spent over $500 per year is in high value bucket). The reason is to always
      have the same proportion of customers in the value segments, and track




      Figure 8.1    Value-Based Marketing Strategies
             Play Four: Predict Customer Value and Value-Based Marketing     117

the average value of these segments. This way retention metrics can be
calculated for the same portion of the population, and this approach is
proofed against change in segment averages.
     The reason for choosing this 10/60/30 is more of a business choice
than mathematical. You can also choose to find the right split by
looking at the histogram of value and decide on the right split in a
more mathematical way. At an apparel retailer we worked with, within
active customers, high-value customers spent $600 on average, whereas
medium-value customers spent $120, and low-value customers spent
$30. This is not atypical; in many cases we’ve seen top 10 percent high-
value customers contribute close to 30-40 percent of all profits, medium-
value customers contribute 60-70 percent and low-value customers
contribute anywhere from 0-10 percent.
     For any mix of customer value segments, you need to pay atten-
tion to how the mix changes over time, making sure that retention
and acquisition for each of these segments trends favorably. The con-
cept behind value-based marketing is to understand the mix of customer
value over time. Figure 8.2 shows how this works by looking at the value
breakdown of customers over the last 12 months (or if you’re using pre-
dictive metrics, you would use predicted next 12-month value against
last 12-month value) and cross-tabulating this against the prior 12-month
value status of the customer. For example, if a customer was a high value
in the prior 12 months and hasn’t placed an order in the last 12 months,
this is defined as a lapsed customer. However, there are three lapsed cus-
tomer segments as shown, ranging from a high, medium, to low value
segment. High-value customers lapsing is much worse than low-value




Figure 8.2     Value Transition and Definition of Value Segments
118                Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      customers (which you might even be better of without in some cases
      where low-value customers contribute negatively to profitability).
           The transition matrix shown in Figure 8.2 can be used to calcu-
      late many useful metrics. The seven segments depicted in the figure
      describe important patterns in your customer data. Segment 1 describes
      customers who have been inactive for a long time (24 months or more
      in this example). These are not only lapsed customers, but customers
      you failed to reactivate. Most marketers have a growing number of these
      customers over the years and provide a pool of opportunity to reactivate
      from the past. Segment 2 is customers who have existed in your cus-
      tomer database and were inactive and recently have been reactivated. The
      importance of reactivation is that it counterbalances efforts of lapsed cus-
      tomers. Segment 3 is customers who stay within their segment of value
      over time. Segment 4 is customers who lapsed in the recent period who
      used to be active. Segment 5 is customers who are migrating upward in
      value, which shows they are increasing their loyalty and value. Segment 6
      is the opposite of 5; these are customers who are migrating downward in
      value and signal attrition risk. Segment 7 is customers who are recently
      acquired and which value they have or are projected to have.
           As we mentioned before, you can either use actual historical value
      or predicted future value when utilizing this framework.
           Figure 8.3 shows an example of this framework. For example, we
      can see that 1,000 customers who used to be high-value customers have
      lapsed. It also shows that of the 21,000 customers acquired, 3,000 of
      them were high-value customers.



                                            Last 12 months
                                    Prior 12 months
                         No.        High     Medium       Low         New
                        Orders      Value     Value       Value     Customer   Total
      No. Orders         20,000     1,000      14,000     20,000                55,000
      High Value          1,000    15,000       2,000      1,000       3,000    22,000
      Medium Value        9,000     5,000      96,000      3,000      14,000   127,000
      Low Value           2,000     2,000      18,000     38,000       4,000    64,000
      Total              32,000    23,000     130,000     62,000      21,000   268,000

      Figure 8.3    Example of Value Transition Framework
          Play Four: Predict Customer Value and Value-Based Marketing            119

                                               Net    Spend/ Value Gain/
               Reactivation New      – Lapsed Change Customer    Loss
High Value        1,000      3,000    (1,000)     3,000    $600    $1,800,000
Medium Value      9,000     14,000   (14,000)     9,000    $120    $1,080,000
Low Value         2,000      4,000   (20,000)   (14,000)    $15     $(210,000)
Total            12,000     21,000   (35,000)    (2,000)           $2,670,000

Figure 8.4 Net Loss/Gain from Acquisition, Reactivation, and
Lapsed Segments


    In Figure 8.4 we show a practical usage of this framework for track-
ing performance of a customer base. We know that for every lapsed
customer, we can either acquire a new one or reactivate an existing
customer. This framework also deals with an important factor; are we
acquiring and reactivating customers of same value compared to lapsed
customers. This shows the retention in a more granular way to uncover
what we call silent attrition, that is, we could be acquiring/reactivating
the same number of customers, but of lower value, therefore losing enter-
prise value. In the example given in Figure 8.4, it shows that the active
customer count (total net gain/loss, which is -2,000 customers) went
down; however, due to increased retention of higher value segments,
the customer value increased by $2.7 million.


Retaining High-Value Customers
Until recently, many firms were unable to identify their high-value cus-
tomers, let alone give them the white glove treatment. Although airlines,
banks, and casinos know it pays to make big investments in retention
incentives for high-value customers, too many midsize organizations still
ignore their best customers.
     Spending to retain high-value customers pays off. Often a small per-
centage of customers make up the majority of revenues. A cosmetics
retailer we work with found that 50 percent of revenue came from just
20 percent of customers. When analyzing its best customers, a popu-
lar flash sales site found that some of its best shoppers spent more than
$100,000 a year with the retailer.
     When a popular home improvement website first started to calculate
lifetime value for their customers, it was surprised to find that some
120              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      customers spent more than 20 times more than the average customer.
      These so-called whales were so important to the company that the CEO
      began picking up the phone to get to know these customers one by one.
      From those conversations, new ideas emerged on how to better serve and
      attract more high-value customers. Similarly, a flash sales site decided to
      send a box of chocolates for Christmas to their entire top 1 percentage
      of customers. This was well worth the money as their top 1 percentage
      made up 20 percentage of their revenues. Technology companies Wufoo
      and Stripe are well known for sending handwritten notes to wow their
      customers.
           In the Harvard Business Review article “Manage Marketing by the
      Customer Equity Test,” authors Robert C. Blattberg and John Deighton
      recount the experiences of McDonald’s. The corporation’s managers
      noted that the value of what they call super-heavy users—typically males
      aged 18 to 34 who eat at McDonald’s an average of three to five times a
      week—account for a whopping 77 percent of its sales. Naturally, retain-
      ing these customers and getting them to eat at its restaurants more often
      is a priority. As a general rule it is much easier to get a current customer
      to use you more often than it is to get a new customer.
           Another example of value-based marketing is airline loyalty rewards
      programs that are based on the dollars you spend with the airline, rather
      than the miles you have flown. This way, higher paying customers auto-
      matically get a greater reward than lower paying customers.
           Marketers should use their retention budgets in order to proactively
      retain high-value customers. If you have an accurate projection of future
      customer lifetime value, you can experiment on what it takes to retain
      this customer. Some organizations might consider crafting separate mar-
      keting plans or even build separate marketing teams to focus on acquisi-
      tion and retention efforts. Titles containing “customer marketing” and
      “customer success” are increasingly popular across many verticals.
           We discuss retention strategies in greater detail in Chapter 13.

      Growing Medium-Value Customers
      Your main strategy for medium-value customers is to nudge them into
      the high-value customer bucket. In addition to selling these customers
      more of the products they are already buying, start predicting what other
      products and categories these shoppers might like. A customer than
          Play Four: Predict Customer Value and Value-Based Marketing         121

who spends $1,000 across three categories, say furniture, clothing, and
kitchenware, has more future value than a customer who spends $1,000
on furniture only. Your strategy should always be to try and get customers
to buy from you across multiple categories.
     Customers who already like a company’s products and services are
less expensive to serve with new products and services. For that reason,
you should be recommending different products to existing customers,
as well as adding new products and services to meet your customers’
evolving needs.
     Companies that fail to use their knowledge of customers to promote
or develop the products or services those people will need next are
leaving the door open for another company to lure those people
away. Although it is tempting to use new products to win whole new
markets, it almost always makes better sense to stick with existing
customer segments.
     Mavi Jeans has been very successful with migrating customers to
higher value segments. For example, the company found a segment of
jean lovers who also had an affinity with certain tops but had never been
marketed these tops. Adding campaigns based on these insights increased
customer lifetime value by 36 percent.
     In his Harvard Business Review article on loyalty-based management,
Frederick F. Reichheld tells the stories of Entenmann’s of New York,
a leader in specialty bakery products, and the car company Honda.
When Entenmann’s saw its sales leveling off, it discovered that as its core
customers aged, they were looking for more fat-free and cholesterol-free
products. So instead of trying to find new customers for its existing prod-
ucts, Entenmann decided that it was more economical to launch a new
fat- and cholesterol-free line of products to serve its existing customers.
The new line has been extremely successful. Similarly, Honda figured
out how to increase a Honda’s owner repurchase rate to 65 percent,
versus the industry average of 40 percent, by launching new cars that
accommodate its customers’ evolving needs. For example, it successfully
marketed the Accord wagon to previous owners of the subcompact
Honda Civic. The wagon was designed to accommodate the evolving
needs of customers acquired in their early twenties who were now
married with children and needed a larger car.
     We discuss strategies to grow customer value in detail in Chapter 12.
122              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      Reducing the Costs to Service Low-Value Customers
      Every brand will find itself with a segment of unprofitable customers.
      It is best to try to reduce the costs to service low-value customers,
      rather than firing these customers outright and leaving the door open
      for competitors to gain strength. In any business scenario, this is a fact of
      life. When acquiring customers, it is impossible to reject low-value cus-
      tomers. However, keeping it in check, that is, understanding, measuring,
      and monitoring the size and value of this segment over time, is extremely
      important. Once you know who is in this segment and why, you can
      focus on formulating strategies to reduce the cost to serve/market to
      this segment. Fortunately, it is now possible to differentiate the level of
      service offered to different customer segments.
           A fashion flash sales site found a particular customer segment
      returned more clothes than they kept and therefore were very unprof-
      itable. The company then decided to market only jewelry to this
      customer segment because online return rates on necklaces and earrings
      are much lower than on clothes and shoes. Other retailers have started
      to differentiate by offering free shipping to some but not all customers.
      If you return a lot of products, you will likely not receive the free
      shipping privilege in the future.
           To that end, First Union Bank has a system called Einstein, which
      automatically assigns a green, yellow, or red flag to each customer.
      Service representatives are instructed not to waive fees for red customers,
      waive them for green customers, and use discretion for yellow cus-
      tomers. They have generated an estimated $100 million in incremental
      additional annual revenue based on this differentiated strategy.
           Likewise, First Chicago Corporation imposed a $3 teller fee on
      money-losing customers (3 percent of their customer base). By identi-
      fying loss-making, high-volume users and sending them notices of fee
      increases, the company reduced its 11 million customer base by 450,000
      in six months.
CHAPTER 9



Play Five: Predict
Likelihood to Buy
or Engage to Rank
Customers

P    ropensity models, also called likelihood to buy or response models, are
     what most people think about with predictive analytics. These mod-
els help predict the likelihood of a certain type of customer behavior,
like whether a customer that is browsing your website is likely to buy
something. In this chapter we examine how marketers can optimize any-
thing from email send frequency, to sales staff time, to money, including
discounts, when armed with information about likelihood to buy or
likelihood to engage.
     Online pet pharmacy PetCareRx has served pet owners for more
than 15 years. It sells many products that customers have to reorder
at varying times from 3 months to 12 months. Like most retailers,
PetCareRx took a one-size-fits-all marketing approach, offering a set
calendar of discounts and promotions to all customers. But not all
customers are alike and many are looking to buy at different times of
the year. Using predictive analytics, PetCareRx was able to differentiate
discounts across customers, leading to higher sales and retention without
increasing costs. Customers were ranked according to their likelihood

                                                                               123
124              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      to buy. Based on that ranking, PetCareRx was able to determine which
      discounts would obtain the optimal response from each customer and
      offer minimal discounts through email or mailed postcards to customers
      who were already deemed likely to buy and offer larger discounts for
      customers who were less likely to buy. The surgical promotions drove
      incremental margin from customers who were already motivated to buy
      and incremental revenue from customers who previously felt no incen-
      tive to buy. Thanks to this and other predictive marketing campaigns,
      quarterly sales increased by 38 percent from the year before, profit
      rose by 24 percent, and customer retention increased by 14 percent.
      Plus, the changes allowed PetCareRx to more than double its cam-
      paign response rates without increasing the marketing or promotional
      budget by a single dollar.


      Likelihood to Buy Predictions
      To predict which prospects are ready to make their first purchase, a like-
      lihood to buy model evaluates nontransaction customer data, such as
      how many times a customer clicked on an email or how the customer
      interacts with your website. These models can also take into account
      certain demographic data. For example, in consumer marketing they
      may compare gender, age, and zip code to other likely buyers. In busi-
      ness marketing, relevant demographics may include industry, job title,
      and geography.
          Here’s how it works: the models compare the prepurchase behavior
      of prospective buyers to the prepurchase behavior of thousands or mil-
      lions of previous customers who ended up buying, comparing attributes
      like what emails they opened and what products they spent the most
      time looking at. The prospects that behave most like the previous buyers
      are tagged as “high-likelihood buyers” and marketers can then alter the
      way they interact with them to increase the likelihood of closing a sale.
      Once you’re armed with this data, you can prioritize your investment in
      each prospective customer.


      Likelihood to Buy for First-Time Buyers
      For consumer marketers, likelihood to buy predictions allow you to
      decide how much of a discount you might allocate to a certain customer
         Play Five: Predict Likelihood to Buy or Engage to Rank Customers     125

because people who are already more likely to buy won’t need as aggres-
sive of a discount as customers who are less likely to buy. The models then
get better over time, as companies collect more data and automatically
test whether predictions actually become reality.
      For instance, the large European household appliance manufacturer
Arcelik maintains a call center where employees are given a list of cus-
tomers who are likely to be ready to buy a new washing machine within
the next few months. Agents then make calls to these customers with
offers such as a year of free detergent with the purchase of a washing
machine. The tactic works well for considered purchases, such as refrig-
erators or cars, and larger-ticket items such as high-end fashion apparel.
      A high-end shoe brand provides store associates with lists of cus-
tomers to call too. The store associates have already developed strong
relationships with their customers but they can be even more successful
when armed with predictive analytics. Employees can now see which
customers are likely to be interested in a certain style when a new sea-
son’s shoe comes out, based on customers’ past behavior or how similar
their purchase habits are to other customers. Employees can then reach
out to customers with that information. A call could go something like
this: “Hi Joe, it has been a while since we’ve spoken. I just wanted to let
you know that there is a new cross-country running shoe I think you
might like. It’s similar to the shoes you bought two years ago, but in a
new material. I have put a pair aside for you in your size. If you have
time, perhaps you could stop by on your way home from work to have a
look?” Who would not want to receive a call or an email like that from
their personal shopper?
      As reported by the New York Times and others, President Barack
Obama used propensity models, specifically propensity to vote for the
Democratic Party, to help him win reelection in 2012. His staff of vol-
unteers could not possibly meet with every voter in the country so the
challenge was to find the undecided voters. There was no point spend-
ing time or money trying to woo diehard Republicans who would not
change their minds anyway, or diehard Democrats who were already
likely to vote for Obama. Rather, using propensity models, Obama’s
team of data scientists found those voters who were undecided but could
still be persuaded. They then focused on finding already strong Obama
supporters in the undecided voter’s social circle and asked them to spend
time with the undecided voter to explain their views.
126               Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      Likelihood to Buy for Repeat Buyers
      What good is spending money to acquire new customers if they only
      buy once and do not return? Therefore, it is not only important to pre-
      dict likelihood to buy for first-time buyers, but it is equally important
      to predict likelihood to buy for repeat buyers. Your goal is to keep cus-
      tomers coming back time and time again. It is happy and loyal customers
      who have a large lifetime value, and many customers with a large lifetime
      value make for large revenues and profits for your company.
          Predicting likelihood to buy for repeat buyers is a lot easier than
      predicting likelihood to buy for first-time buyers because there is a lot
      more information to go on. The likelihood to buy model for repeat pur-
      chases evaluates earlier transactions as well as other interactions similar to
      the model for prospects. However, the added information derived from
      the first purchase can significantly improve the accuracy of the likeli-
      hood to buy model for repeat purchases, as compared to a similar model
      for prospects. Unlike the first purchase predictions, repeat purchase pre-
      dictions utilize all interactions of the customer, such as past purchases,
      returned purchases, and phone calls to customer service.

      Choosing the Right Level of Discount Using
      Likelihood to Buy
      There are two main uses for likelihood to buy predictions: which
      customers to focus on and how much money, including discounts,
      to spend on each customer.
            Choosing your audience carefully is important if you want to opti-
      mize marketing ROI, because reaching customers can be expensive. For
      instance, a direct mail or call campaign that costs $1 per customer inter-
      action and has a 2 percent purchase rate could cost $50 a person before
      a discount is even given. If you can target your audience and make the
      communications more relevant, the purchase rate could be significantly
      higher, say 10 percent, reducing the cost to reach each buyer significantly.
      In addition to choosing the right people, you can increase purchase rates
      by including relevant recommendations or content and to communicate
      with customers at the right time. Focusing on relevancy will allow com-
      panies to reduce their dependency on high discounts. Using this strategy
      it is possible to significantly reduce discounts as a part of their customer
      acquisition strategy. Figure 9.1 shows how a large U.S. retailer was able
         Play Five: Predict Likelihood to Buy or Engage to Rank Customers      127




Figure 9.1   Percentage Customers Acquired with Discounts

to reduce the number of customers lured by high discounts from 36
percent to 27 percent, well below the industry average of 31 percent.
     Discounts and other incentives can still be used as a sweetener in nec-
essary cases, such as targeting a customer who has abandoned her cart.
However, we recommend you do not give out discounts to everybody
or else you will train your customers to get used to discounts. Instead,
start with recommendations and reminders and use discounts only if you
need them. The lack of understanding of the individual customer leads
to blanket discounts, which reduces overall profit margins considerably.
Only about 20 percent of customers are “discount junkies,” people who
will only make purchases when given a discount, according to an anal-
ysis of 150 retailers. About 15 percent generally pay full price for most
of their products, while the majority of customers fall somewhere in
between, the data show. By analyzing their customers’ behavior, mar-
keters can determine which customers may need more encouragement
in the form of a gift or discount. It can also help marketers flag cus-
tomers who will come back and buy anyway, so no additional monetary
encouragement is needed. This model helps to maximize both revenue
and profitability from each member of your customer base.
     Targeting discounts is good for business and good for customers.
By surgically targeting discounts, retailers avoid margin erosion, which
128               Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      in turn reduces the price increases retailers would normally have to take
      to make up for the lower profit margins. That practice effectively lowers
      prices for all customers. This is a simple but very powerful paradigm shift
      for marketers who traditionally focus on product lines, merchandising,
      and one-size-fits-all discounting. Behavioral and life cycle data available
      at the customer level combined with the predictive insight about likeli-
      hood to buy allows marketers to surgically discount to maximize margin
      and customer lifetime value.
            Also, if you are going to include an incentive or discount to acquire,
      retain, or reactivate a customer, there is no need to go beyond the level
      of discount that customers are used to seeing. Predictive analytics allows
      you to tailor offers based on what level of discount triggered past cus-
      tomer purchases. Customers with a high likelihood to buy may get a
      lower discount but perhaps other perks such as early access to products
      to drive more purchases. Customers with a low likelihood to buy or
      those who only buy on discount (a behavior-based cluster) might get a
      higher discount.
            A multichannel retailer of sports goods used to send all of its
      customers a 50 percent clearance discount at set times during the
      year. This campaign was motivated by its desire to clear old inventory.
      In other words, it was a product or merchandising-centric campaign,
      not a customer-centric campaign. This campaign trained customers to
      wait for the big annual sale and brought in few dollars for the retailer.
      Using predictive analytics, this company analyzed the likelihood to buy
      and discount sensitivity of all of its customers. If a customer is likely
      to buy with an offer of 25 percent off, you don’t need to give them a
      50 percent discount. Using predictive analytics, the retailer identified the
      right discount level for different groups of customers. Now the retailer
      still sends discount emails at set times, but it will send different levels of
      discounts to different groups of customers. It sends just enough to get
      the customer to buy, but not too much to give away unnecessary margin.
      Using this approach the retailer was able to achieve an overall increase in
      revenues of 20 percent.


      Predictive Lead Scoring for Business Marketers
      If you are in business marketing you can equally prioritize your invest-
      ment using likelihood to buy models. You can ensure that your sales
         Play Five: Predict Likelihood to Buy or Engage to Rank Customers      129

team spends most of their time with the prospects that have the highest
likelihood to become buyers. This can have an enormous impact.
     Consider the following example in marketing business software.
Let’s say you have a free trial for your software. Not all people who sign
up for your free service have a serious intent to buy. It is not uncommon
that 70 percent of free-trial signups are made just out of curiosity
without an immediate need or budget to buy. Another 20 percent are
serious evaluators and 10 percent are on the fence: they could go either
way. If you randomly call people from a list, perhaps based on company
size, it is easy to see how you may end up wasting your entire day on
prospects that aren’t serious. It is especially important to prioritize your
time if you are serving small- and medium-size businesses, of which
there may be millions.
     The main difference between predicting likelihood to buy in con-
sumer and business marketing is due to the nature of the purchase deci-
sion process. In most business marketing, the decision process is long
and complex. Figure 9.2 compares the considered and quick decision
processes.
     With a considered purchase, which most business marketing falls
under, the decision process is longer and includes many interactions
between the marketer and the buyer. This requires special attention to
focus on all prospects within the decision funnel. Hence business mar-
keters turn to all interactions and signals from prospects to determine
who is most likely to buy and therefore worthy of time and attention.
     Because the replacement and delivery cycles for vendors, deals,
services, and products can take a long time, most B2B marketers are
hyperfocused on acquiring new customers, rather than getting existing
customers to come back, where likelihood to buy first purchase models
take greater importance.

                                           Considered   Quick Decision
         Decision Cycle                    6 months     1–7 days
         Interactions during sales cycle   10           2
         Average order value               $30,000      $200
         Replacement cycle                 1 year       1 month
         Users impacted                    Many         1
         Functionality                     Complex      Simple

Figure 9.2   Considered versus Quick Decisions
130                 Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      Basic               Point system: Each activity has specific points and these are added to
                             create a score, which becomes the lead score. The score for each
                             activity is arbitrarily determined. For example, a document
                             download is 5 points and an email click is 1 point.
      RFM-like            This is similar to Recency-Frequency-Monetary (RFM) scoring used in
                             catalog marketing, where the leads get a composite score based on
                             not only activity, but also size of the opportunity, deal size, and
                             engagement metrics such as email opens, web visits, webinar
                             attendance, and so on.
      Predictive lead     Predictive lead scoring builds on the first two basic models by learning
         scoring             from the past in a statistical manner. The predictive model learns
                             from successful deals closed in the past and looks at the prospect
                             behavior prior to deal closing and learns from those behaviors to help
                             come to a decision.
      Next action         The best models not only predict a lead score but also the next action
        scoring              that could increase the overall likelihood of closing the deal.
                             These are highly complex models that are mostly custom-built.
                             However, these models take into account specific sequences of events
                             rather than mere event occurrences.

      Figure 9.3        Lead Scoring Methods for Business Marketers

           Predictive models are not the only way to prioritize prospects for
      business marketers. However, predictive models are by far the most accu-
      rate and relatively easy to use. Figure 9.3 gives an overview of lead scoring
      methods beyond predictive methods.

      Likelihood to Engage Models
      Likelihood to engage models predict how likely it is that a customer
      will open or click on your emails. High email engagement is a strong
      predictor of buying intend. On the other hand, if likelihood to engage
      is low, subscribers may opt out from your list. Many consumers no
      longer bother to unsubscribe from your list, but simply stop opening
      your emails. For all intents and purposes this has the same effect, and
      cost, as a true opt out. When a customer unsubscribes from your mail-
      ing list, you will no longer be able to reach this consumer with pro-
      motions. Every retail marketer knows that email campaigns mean sales
      and cash for the retailer: with every promotional email sent out, new
      orders flood in. Email marketing works well to drive revenues. However,
      when it comes to email, you need to balance the short-term revenues
         Play Five: Predict Likelihood to Buy or Engage to Rank Customers      131

it can yield, with long-term revenues. If you send too many emails,
you may receive short-term revenues from some customers, but lose the
long-term revenues of those who unsubscribe.
     The challenge for most marketers is to send as many emails as possi-
ble in order to generate as much engagement and purchases as possible,
without causing a subscriber to opt out or ignore you. By using a like-
lihood to engage model, you can potentially send fewer emails to each
customer, drastically lower unsubscribe rates, and achieve higher cus-
tomer engagement. If a customer isn’t going to open an email, there
is no point in sending it. That email may seem free, but in reality opt
outs cost big bucks. In fact, our research shows that every opt out costs
your company about 60 percent of that customer’s future lifetime value.
Let’s say a customer’s future lifetime value is $1,000, because you expect
that customer to make 10 purchases of $100 each over the course of the
next three years. Now if this customer unsubscribes from your email list,
they will not be notified about new product offerings. Without an email
to remind them, they may place only four orders, instead of 10, over the
next three years. In other words, their potential future lifetime value just
went down from $1,000 to $400—a reduction of 60 percent.
     When Uncommon Goods, an online retailer of unusual gifts,
adjusted its email contact frequency, results were amazing. It was able
to lower its unsubscribe rates by 50 percent without hurting sales. It
achieved the same results with fewer emails, because the customers
were delighted that emails were just with the right frequency, and
the frequency adjusted automatically when customers increased their
engagement. The key to the Uncommon Goods success was to vary
email frequency by customers, depending on their level of engagement
and their likelihood to unsubscribe.
     In our experience, email subscribers typically fall into five sepa-
rate groups based on their likelihood to engage: Enthusiasts, Mainstreet,
Sleepies, and Phantoms, and one special group, the Newbies. Enthu-
siasts are the subscribers that have the highest likelihood to open and
click your emails. Figure 9.4 summarizes the open and click rates for
each of these segments. The click rate of Mainstreet subscribers is about
half that of Enthusiasts and a fraction of the open rate of the Enthusiasts.
Sleepy subscribers have very low engagement predictions, and Phantom
subscribers are ones with virtually no engagement, receiving your emails
but rarely opening them. Newbie subscribers are a special group: they are
132                Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing




      Figure 9.4    Open and Click Rates of Different Email Segments


      the ones who have recently signed up for your email list. Their open and
      click rate tends to lie in between Enthusiasts and Mainstreet subscribers.
           We found that email subscribers who most frequently open and click
      on emails also generate the most money—not because they buy more
      expensive items but because they buy more frequently. For every $1 spent
      by email Enthusiasts, Mainstreet subscribers spend $0.58 and Sleepy sub-
      scribers, who rarely open email, spend only $0.34. Enthusiasts bought
      1.75 times more frequently than Mainstreet customers and 2.9 times
      more often than Sleepies.
           Interestingly, once you get a customer to buy, they buy for a similar
      dollar value regardless of their engagement level, which can be an oppor-
      tunity for the savvy marketer: your email enthusiasts already love your
      brand and buy often. You can try to nudge them toward higher-value
      products with the right incentives.
           Newbies, which are email subscribers who have recently graduated
      from their email welcome campaign, are very lucrative customers: in our
      example they spent $1.24 for every $1 spent by Enthusiasts. Newbies also
      have very high open and click rates. In this respect they can be thought of
      as “baby Enthusiasts.” But they differ from Enthusiasts in one major way:
      they also have the highest unsubscribe rate of all segments. So Newbies
      are very engaged yet very reactive: they are opening and clicking your
      emails but are quick to unsubscribe if they don’t like what they see.
      We usually see that more than 60 percent of unsubscribes from a new
      email subscription come within the first 90 days of subscription. This is
      an important takeaway: realize that new subscribers are almost always
      starting out very enthusiastically. They are basically yours to lose, and
      almost all behave like your best customers.
         Play Five: Predict Likelihood to Buy or Engage to Rank Customers        133

    Another behavioral difference between different groups of email
subscribers is the sales channel mix for the different email engagement
segments. Email Enthusiasts buy primarily from email click-through
referral. At the other end of the spectrum, email Sleepies buy primarily
through search engines or directly on your website (without referral).
This suggests different behavior patterns. Customers that are less engaged
with your emails are more utilitarian shoppers: they have a need and
seek you out (either through a search engine or by coming directly to
your website) and then they buy. Customers who are highly engaged
with your emails are also strongly influenced by these emails. You might
say that they are more impulsive: they might not have planned to buy,
but were tempted by your irresistible email!

How Often to Email Your Customers
Finding the correct email cadence is tricky. You are looking to strike a
balance between maximizing short-term email click-through revenue
(typically by sending more emails) and minimizing long-term loss
due to email opt-outs. The answer varies by customer segment: email
Enthusiasts may not mind hearing from you every day, whereas those
who rarely open your email cannot be emailed more than a couple of
times a month. What is at stake is for customers to unsubscribe and the
risk of losing future revenues that comes from being able to email relevant
offers. As Figure 9.5 illustrates, there is a magical point that optimizes the




Figure 9.5   How to Balance Short- and Long-Term Email Revenues
134                Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      net revenue from your email campaigns as deducting the cost of sending
      as well as the lost, future revenues due to unsubscribes.
           So how to find that magical sweet spot? No surprise here: Testing!
      But be careful because email frequency testing needs to be done right. In
      order to truly test the effect of reduced frequency, you must design your
      test to remove other factors that might lead you to wrong conclusions.
      For example: let’s say you typically send two emails per week to your
      entire contact database. On Mondays you send a “hot deals” email and
      on Thursdays you send a personalized product recommendation email.
      Now you want to test a 50 percent reduction in email frequency on a test
      group. You sample your test group randomly (so far so good) and send
      them only the Monday email for one month and measure the response.
      The problem is that the response you get actually measures three con-
      founded factors: (1) reduced frequency, (2) day of the week, (3) email
      content type.
           Instead, we recommend measuring both the cumulative opt-out rate
      as well as the purchase rate during the test period. Figure 9.6 walks you
      through the thought process. Purchase rate is defined as the percent of
      customers in the test group that made any purchase during the test.
      This is a better sales metrics than purchase dollars, which can be very
      noisy. The interplay of these two metrics will guide you in your deci-
      sion whether to reduce frequency or not. The key is to run a reduced
      email frequency test against a control group: for some of your email




      Figure 9.6    When to Reduce Email Frequency
         Play Five: Predict Likelihood to Buy or Engage to Rank Customers      135

subscribers continue as you usually would. For another group reduce
your email frequency by 25 percent or even 50 percent. Run the test for
as long as it takes your control group to receive at least 10 emails, but 15
is even better (yes, waiting is painful).
     Now compare the two groups and ask yourself: Is the unsubscribe
rate for the “reduced email frequency” group lower? If not, you don’t
need to change anything, because the main incentive to reduce fre-
quency is to reduce unsubscribes. However, if the unsubscribe rate went
down, the next question to ask is whether the purchase rate is also
reduced. If the unsubscribe rate went down, but the purchase rate is
unaffected, then reducing email frequency is a no-brainer. It will give
you the same short-term revenue while preserving a lot of future rev-
enue upside (by retaining these people on your email list). If, however,
the purchase rate is reduced when you send fewer emails, then you need
to ask yourself whether a strong case can be made that the long-term
revenue gain outweighs the short-term revenue loss. This is a very hard
question to answer—you need to estimate the cost of an unsubscribe in
terms of loss of future revenue relative to the short-term email revenue
you get per customer from the extra emails you send.
     Most marketers err on the side of caution and make decisions
based on the short-term revenues. I can’t blame them. Fortunately, in
our experience, some clients can reduce email frequency by as much
as 50 percent without hurting immediate revenues (purchase rate).
Reduced frequency may have other benefits: reduced send cost and
potential increase in deliverability—but these are secondary consider-
ations only after you convince yourself that you can reduce opt-outs
without reducing revenue.
     It is possible to reduce the unsubscribe rate without hurting rev-
enues. Figure 9.7 plots the trajectory of one company following this
strategy. They were able to maintain the cumulative margin per customer
over time, while at the same time reducing the cumulative unsubscribe
rate from 1.5 percent to 1.1 percent.
     If you want to get started right now with frequency control, rather
than waiting for the full test cycle, here are some final recommendations:

Newbies In the first 60 days from opt in do not send regular emails to
this segment—only life cycle and triggered emails—Newbies are quick
to opt out if they get a lot of nonrelevant emails.
136                Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing




      Figure 9.7    Reducing Opt-Outs with Equal Margin Dollars

      Phantoms and Sleepies Send general emails at much lower fre-
      quency than your normal cadence. Example: if you typically send cus-
      tomers one email a week, this segment should only receive one email
      a month. If you send three to seven emails a week, they should receive
      only one a week.

      Enthusiasts Do you have the ability to produce additional content?
      If so, consider sending an extra email to your Enthusiasts to see if you
      can get them to buy even more.
CHAPTER 10



Play Six: Predict
Individual
Recommendations
for Each Customer

A   North American beauty and cosmetics company with hundreds of
    stores was looking to personalize its communications to hundreds
of thousands of customers and ensure that every online interaction
between the brand and its customers was consistent with its messaging.
It wanted to shift the mind-set from being discount-driven to improving
customer service and satisfaction. The company chose to combine
cluster-based targeting with personalized recommendations to send
customers more strategic, personalized offers. The company first used
predictive analytics to organize its customers in product-based clusters
such as “bath and beauty” and “face cream.” Then it emailed each of
these customers content and recommendations that were based on their
cluster. Clearly customers liked the emails and the company was able to
increase revenues per email by six times.
    In this chapter we learn all about making recommendations to cus-
tomers. Recommender systems have been around for almost 20 years,
Amazon being the primary example that started using this early on.
There are three parts to making personalized recommendations: sending

                                                                           137
138              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      recommendations to customers at the right time, understanding the
      context, and sending the right content.
          First generation recommender systems used simple rules configured
      by human beings based on things like keywords or titles. In other words,
      a merchandiser or content marketer set up a rule so that everybody
      who bought shoes would get a recommendation for protective spray
      shortly thereafter: “if browsing for shoes, also recommend spray.”
      These first-generation systems used people, rather then predictive
      algorithms, to make recommendations.
          Especially in categories with large selections, such as books, videos,
      and content, recommender systems utilizing the so-called wisdom of the
      crowd are more effective. Actual usage data or review data from users has
      more information than metadata like title, description, and keywords that
      describe the content. When we are trying to find a restaurant, book, or
      a movie, we tend not to trust canned descriptions of the product we
      are looking to buy. Instead, we ask trusted friends and colleagues what
      they think. The same logic is used with recommender systems, which
      can figure out which customers are most similar to an individual user
      and use behavioral data (usage, reviews, purchases, views, downloads)
      to recommend other content for that person. This strategy will allow for
      more relevant recommendations, rather than just trying to recommend
      products based on certain labels or content. In mathematical terms, these
      user-based recommendations are called collaborative filtering.


      Choosing the Right Customer or Segment
      The first question to answer is who to make a recommendation to and
      when. Good times to make recommendations are either during a pur-
      chase or after a purchase—and at certain times during a customer’s life
      cycle, such as when you have not heard from a customer for a while.
      These recommendations are referred to as upsell, cross-sell, and next-sell
      recommendations, respectively.


      Recommendations Made at the Time of Purchase
      Upsell and cross-sell recommendations can be made to customers dur-
      ing a purchase, served on a website’s product page, or during checkout.
         Play Six: Predict Individual Recommendations for Each Customer        139

A basic example of upselling is asking a McDonald’s customer if she wants
to supersize her meal, but similar instances can be found in all industries.
You could suggest a higher-end version or a multipack of the same prod-
uct, perhaps at a better price. Upsell recommendations are typically tied
to a specific product: each product has other suggested products that can
be used as upsells.
     Cross-sell recommendations are also made at the time of pur-
chase. Rather than recommending buying a larger or better version
of a specific product, cross-sell recommendations are made to suggest
other products that are typically bought alongside this specific item.
The recommendation could read: “customers who bought a printer
also tend to buy printer ink …” and you could offer a modest discount
if the customer decides to buy your cross-sell bundle. Like upsell
recommendations, cross-sell recommendations also tend to be tied to
specific products: every product has suggested products that can be used
as cross-sells.
     Upsell and cross-sell recommendations are a great way to increase
average order value. Most upsell and cross-sell recommendations are tied
to the product, rather than to a specific customer.
     Of course recommendations do not have to be product recommen-
dations. The online fare comparison engine Kayak developed a price
prediction tool to advise the shopper on whether they should buy or
wait, depending on the confidence of a price drop. Kayak uses this
competitive advantage to improve customer experience and retain cus-
tomers: “We want [travelers] to get to the best decision for their needs
as easily as possible,” said Robert Birge, Kayak’s chief marketing offi-
cer in an interview with USA Today. (Source: www.usatoday.com/story/
travel/flights/2013/01/15/kayak-advice/1834225/.)
     The European eyeglass retailer Alain Afflelou revolutionized the
optic market by launching the “Tchin Tchin” offer: when the customer
bought a pair of corrective glasses, she could buy corrective sunglasses
for only 1 additional euro. Used as an acquisition tool, this cross-
sell recommendation at the time of the purchase presented limited
upsell opportunities but enabled the company to grow its customer
base by 50 percentage in three years according to the CEO in an article
on the marketing strategies website www.strategies.fr. (Source: www
.strategies.fr/actualites/marques/155836W/tchin-tchin-alain-afflelou-
recidive.html.)
140              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      Recommendations Made After a Purchase
      Next-sell recommendations are typically made after a customer has
      already made a purchase. This type of recommendation could be
      included in a thank you page or in the confirmation email.
           The best next-sell recommendations are specific for each customer
      and take into account more customer data than just the most recent
      transaction. By the time somebody has completed a transaction, you
      know who this person is and should be able to make a more personal-
      ized recommendation. The more you know about a person, the better
      the recommendation. So if you can analyze all the purchases that a per-
      son has made, both online as well as in-store, your recommendations
      will be more accurate than if you are only looking at online transactions.
      So, as we discussed in Chapter 3, make sure to base your recommenda-
      tions on complete customer profiles that tie all customer actions back to
      the same person.
           Remember the home improvement store that found that people who
      build decks tend to be in the market for a grill shortly thereafter? A mar-
      keting program was devised to capitalize on this knowledge. Similarly, the
      grills company who found customers need wood pellets after their initial
      purchase of a grill now sends regular pellet replenishment reminders.

      Recommendations Made During the Customer Life Cycle
      You can try to use recommendations to reengage or reactivate lapsed cus-
      tomers. In this case, first you use predictive analytics to identify a group
      of customers at risk of leaving. Then you can reengage these customers
      with a personalized email. The recommendation can be a product, con-
      tent, or relevant person. The power of recommendations is that they can
      be dynamically inserted into a web page or email and create an entirely
      personalized experience without having to redo the creative for each
      customer. The web page or email design is the same for every customer.
      Even the text in the page or email could be the same, telling lapsed cus-
      tomers “we miss you, please come back soon, we have these products
      waiting for you” but include person-specific recommendations.
            Be careful using product recommendations if the customer has not
      bought for a long time. The product recommendations might be obso-
      lete and the context of the customer might have changed completely:
      it is a new season, the customer might have picked up new hobbies, or
         Play Six: Predict Individual Recommendations for Each Customer       141

life events might have occurred. Make sure you base your dynamic con-
tent on the latest information you have on the customer, and in some
cases it might be better to use recent content, rather than products, to
entice the customer.


Understanding Customer Context
Beyond the right time to send a recommendation, there is more context
to take into account when making recommendations. For example, if a
user who generally likes documentary movies is trying to find a movie
he can watch with his children, the context needs to be recognized and
the recommendation made relevant for that context. Likewise, a retailer
might recognize that a shopper, who usually purchases work clothes,
might this time be shopping for a special occasion and make a contextual
recommendation, upselling or cross-selling jewelry and shoes to fit the
occasion. Context could also be what products a customer has bought
in the past. If you are going to recommend accessories for an electronic
device, you better make sure that the accessories are actually compatible
with the device the customer has purchased in the past.
     Basic recommendations are “people who liked this product, also
liked …” type recommendations. We call these product-to-product recom-
mendations because a recommendation is generated with a specific
product as the starting point or context. This could also be content-to-
content or person-to-person type recommendation. By looking at what
customers frequently buy or read together, you can make recommen-
dations even if you do not know anything about the person looking at
the page. These recommendations are often added to a product page.
While you are looking at a specific book, you also see the other books
people who bought that book liked. If you are looking at a person’s
profile on LinkedIn, you may receive recommendations for other profiles
to check out. If you are reading an article on your favorite news site, you
may be recommended other content to check out.
     The problem is that perhaps you have already bought some of the
books that are being recommended to you, or read some of the arti-
cles that are being displayed. Also, there may be very different personas
or clusters considering the same product. If a school teacher and a stu-
dent both look at the same book, they may have very different reasons
or interests in considering the purchase. This is where person-specific
142              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      recommendations come in. If you also know a customer’s demographic
      profile, past behavior, and location, you have more personal context to
      make accurate recommendations about companion products. We call
      these user-to-product recommendations because the starting point for making
      a recommendation is the information you have about a specific per-
      son. Person-specific recommendations require you to both recognize
      the customer as well as have a history with this customer rich enough to
      generate recommendations.
           Making irrelevant or out-of-context recommendations is probably
      worse than not making any recommendations at all. A well-known
      Forrester analyst received an email promising her the latest shoes in just
      her size. She eagerly clicked the email link but was redirected to a page
      with oversize shoes (rather than her size X). She was so disappointed
      about the experience that she tweeted about it. A happy customer tells
      5 friends, but an unhappy one tells 20! So make sure your customer data
      is complete and accurate before you start making recommendations
      based on customer profiles.
           Also, have you ever received an email or an advertisement with rec-
      ommendations specifically for you, only to find that when you clicked on
      the email or advertisement it took you to a generic web page? Here the
      retailer is offering the promise of personalization but then does not fol-
      low through. The problem here is coordination across channels. Clearly
      this company’s email and web systems are not coordinated. Again, an
      incomplete personalized experience may deliver more disappointment
      than delight.
           As we mentioned in Chapter 7, the freemium business model
      relies heavily on the use of relevant and contextual recommendations
      to transform active users into paying customers. The online music
      platform Spotify manages to keep a steady ratio of 25 percentage
      paid to free users (15 million paying users in January 2015), even
      after the early adopter wave. In an article on TechCrunch the com-
      pany’s top management team explains that their mobile application
      drives much of this growth. Indeed, in Spotify’s mobile free version,
      users can listen to an artist, but they have to listen to advertise-
      ments regularly and they cannot pick a specific song. If they try to
      do so several times in a row, a recommendation of the premium
      version at $9.99 per month pops up in the application. Spotify
      makes sure to emphasize all the advantages of the premium version
      when the user’s frustration reaches its paroxysm! Recommendations
         Play Six: Predict Individual Recommendations for Each Customer         143

in the right context are key to the success of Spotify here. (Source: http://
techcrunch.com/2015/01/12/spotify-now-has-15m-paying-users-60m-
overall/ and Spotify app.)


Content—What to Recommend
Recommendations, whether for products, people, or content, make for
great relevant and personalized content in customer communications.
In fact, relevancy trumps the creative quality of the content. In tests
comparing the performance of super-creative and meticulously designed
emails against the performance of more basic, dynamically created emails
with personalized recommendations we found that the click-through
rates of more relevant emails are three to four times greater than the
click-through rates of the more beautiful emails. Clearly customers pre-
ferred relevancy over design—although there is nothing to say you can’t
have both.
     Increasingly, customers are demanding control over the products or
content that companies are displaying. Perhaps the most famous example
of recommendations gone wrong is when Target began sending baby
and pregnancy-focused marketing mailers to customers they had iden-
tified with a high likelihood of being pregnant. In one instance, Target
was spot-on but the customer had not informed her parents about the
pregnancy and thus the recommendation was highly unwelcome and
considered a violation of her privacy. We predict that over the next
decade, most marketing interactions with the customer will become
two-way, where the customer will be able to provide input and gain
control over their own data.
     This example has practically become synonymous for all that is good
and bad about predictive analytics. In response, retailers are trying to give
consumers more control over the purchases brands take into account
when making recommendations. For instance, you likely don’t want
that lice shampoo you bought last week to continue generating rec-
ommendations going forward. We get back to privacy in Chapter 17 of
this book.
     As a marketer you want a level of control over the products that
will be recommended as well. You don’t want your predictive algo-
rithms to recommend products that are out of stock, or very low priced
items that are strictly accessories or refills to other products. There are
144              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      merchandising or exception rules that you should configure before rely-
      ing on automated algorithms to populate recommendations on your
      website or emails.
          Recommender systems know when a product is new, whether it’s
      gaining traction, or being viewed more or less over time, and are able to
      adjust recommendations accordingly. For example, when Apple releases
      a new iPhone, the new model iPhone is viewed less frequently than the
      old number in absolute numbers because the old phone has been around
      longer, but because the latest model is new and trending higher, a rec-
      ommender system will identify it as more relevant when a user searches
      for an iPhone. Recommender systems take these factors into account
      and use temporal knowledge to learn and forget, so recommendations
      are up-to-date and relevant.


      Beyond Recommendations
      Recommendations are most frequently associated with website per-
      sonalization. However, you can deliver recommendations in any
      channel: email, mobile, social, web, phone, or via display advertising.
      Recommendations thus can be a driving force for both inbound and
      outbound communications.
           At the same time, there are many other ways to personalize an
      experience—on the website or other—beyond delivering product
      recommendations. In fact, all the concepts discussed in this book so far,
      from value-based marketing to life cycle marketing, are opportunities
      to personalize customer experiences—on the web and others channels.
      What if you could greet a high-value VIP customer on your website
      with a special message? Or if you could welcome back a lapsed customer
      after a long absence. Think what the barista would say if you walk into
      your local coffee shop after a long absence. Would he say “hey, you
      are a woman?”—No! Much better would be: “Hi Omer, it has been a
      long time! I’m so glad to see you back! Can I serve you the usual—a
      nonfat, decaf latte?” Just addressing customers by their first name alone
      can have a big impact. A software vendor, Do Inbound, found that
      simply addressing people by their first names in the thank you page of a
      walkthrough video increased the conversion rate from the walkthrough
      video to account sign-up by three times.
CHAPTER 11



Play Seven: Launch
Predictive Programs
to Convert More
Customers

N    ow it’s time to put it all together. In these final three chapters of
     Part Two we look at a number of strategies and campaigns you can
use to deliver value throughout the customer life cycle. First we look at
how you can use predictive analytics in order to convert more prospects,
and we look at how to use look-alike targeting, a predictive technique in
its own right, in combination with clusters and other customer segments
to acquire better customers.


Predictive Remarketing Campaigns
Retargeting or remarketing, which are used interchangeably here, enable
marketers to reengage people who have previously expressed interest in a
brand, product, or service by interactions like visiting the brand’s website
or reading one of its emails. Retargeting is usually associated with visits
to your website, and the subsequent reminder to come back is usually
directed at you via display advertising. Remarketing programs work in


                                                                               145
146              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      shorter timescales, in hours or days, because their primary objective is to
      increase conversions within a specific context created by the consumer.
           You probably have experienced these advertisements: after you look
      at a pair of shoes on Zappos, and after leaving the site, the pair will
      follow you around the web. Whether you are on your Facebook page
      or browsing another website—you will often see an advertisement with
      the specific pair show up in your feed or sidebar.
           The trigger of retargeting however does not have to be limited to a
      visit to your website. It can also be an email you have clicked, a visit to
      the store, or a call to the help desk. Similarly, the reminder doesn’t have
      to be delivered via display advertising. The reminder can equally come
      via email or phone call. When channels other than display advertising
      are used, this marketing technique is usually referred to as remarketing.
      It seems that some channels are more effective than others when it comes
      to remarketing. A November 2014 survey of 3,000 consumers in the
      United Kingdom and the United States by research agency Conlumino
      discovered that 66 percent of American consumers appreciate an email
      offer related to something they looked at online previously, but only
      24 percent appreciate receiving this same offer in the form of an online
      advertisement. When using remarketing strategies, every marketer
      needs to consider privacy and the “creepy” factor. This is a very delicate
      balance that we cover in more detail in Chapter 17.
           When customers visit your website, they directly and indirectly share
      a lot of information about their interests and intents with you. You can
      analyze not only the number, time, duration, and frequency of their vis-
      its, but also look at the search terms used to find your site, the specific
      pages of your site visited, the items looked at, any on-site searches con-
      ducted, and potentially items abandoned in a shopping basket on your
      site. All of these pieces of information can be used to do personalized
      outreach to these visitors in follow-up communications to try to bring
      them back to your company. A simple reminder can often help bring
      customers back to your site.
           If the person you are retargeting has been to your website before,
      and perhaps has even bought from you before, you have even more
      information to personalize the reminder. For return visitors you can cal-
      culate their likelihood to buy and the clusters that they belong to, among
      other things. Armed with this information, you can further customize
       Play Seven: Launch Predictive Programs to Convert More Customers       147

the outreach, increasing your chances of bringing that customer back.
For example, if the person who abandoned a search session or a shop-
ping cart is a high-value shopper with a low likelihood to buy, you might
as well include a discount to try and get that customer to come back.
You have little to lose when the likelihood to buy is low and a lot to gain
when the predicted lifetime value is high.
     You can reach consumers with retargeting reminders using display
advertising, search advertising (Google Remarketing Lists for Search
Ads), Facebook advertising (Facebook Custom Audiences), Twitter
(Twitter Tailored Audiences), email, direct mail, or phone calls.
     You can only retarget consumers if you can recognize them.
You could identify a user based on personally identifiable information
such as an email address, or a cookie, a small text file that stores
information on your hard drive and helps advertisers track you as you
move across the web. If all you have is a cookie, then all you can do is
target display advertising to follow this user around the web. However, if
you can recognize a user’s email address, from current or past browsing
sessions, then you have better options. You can now target this customer
using email, Facebook advertising, or, if you can tie the email to a
physical address, even a postcard.
     There are some techniques you can use to recognize more anony-
mous visitors to your website. For example, you can tag and capture a
web visitor’s email address upon account creation and subsequent login,
or tag and capture their email address on any forms that collect emails
on the site—the most typical of which are newsletter sign-ups and guest
checkout (customers provide an email there for confirmation purposes).
A lot of the web traffic comes from email clicks, so a major boost in
identification can be gotten when the client includes the user identity in
the email links, so that the identity is passed in the URL (either as raw
email address or as some encrypted ID) or puts code on the site to parse
and decode the user ID from the link. Basically your goal is to capture
the identity whenever possible and associate it with the cookie, so you
can identify subsequent anonymous sessions by that user. Using these
techniques and others, some brands have been able to recognize half of
the visitors to their website as compared to the industry average of only
10 percent of known visitors.
     Examples of predictive remarketing campaigns follow.
148              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      Predictive Abandoned Cart Campaigns
      Abandoned cart campaigns consistently rank among those with the high-
      est ROI. The Baymard Institute tracks cart abandonment rate statistics
      and finds that an average of 68 percent of shopping carts are abandoned
      on average. Considering this high abandonment rate, all online retail-
      ers should have an effective abandoned cart reminder campaign in place.
      An abandoned cart email sees an average open rate of about 30%, as
      compared to 14 percentage for broadcast emails. The click rate is about
      8% as compared to 1.5 percentage and the revenue per email sent for an
      abandoned cart campaign in retail is about $2.50 as compared to $0.05.
           A January 2015 AgilOne survey among 132 retail-marketing exec-
      utives revealed that slightly more than half of retailers have completely
      implemented an abandoned cart campaign. This was up from 39 percent
      of online sellers in the same survey the year prior.
           For most companies and industries, email is the best format for
      an abandoned cart campaign. For some large-ticket items, a postcard
      reminder can be effective. When designing your email, don’t make it
      too complicated. Simply remind the potential customers of their aban-
      doned cart and include a link to easily bring them back to their cart or
      checkout page. You want to get them to the checkout page with as few
      distractions as possible.
           Experiment with timing. Measure the response rate to find out how
      long after the cart is abandoned to send the message. There are different
      schools of thought here. Some technology vendors recommend that you
      send a reminder as soon as possible. However, in our experience, faster
      is not always better. There are several reasons why you might want to
      wait a couple of hours, or preferably a full day, to send an abandoned cart
      campaign. First, some consumers find it creepy that you remind them
      right away. It strengthens the feeling that you are “watching every move
      of your customers.” That is exactly what most marketers are doing, but
      you may want to be a bit subtle about it. Second, if you have multi-
      ple channels it is very possible that some customers abandon a cart but
      subsequently buy the item using another channel, for example, your call
      center. Unless your call center software is synchronized in real time to the
      system that sends the abandoned cart reminders, you may want to wait a
      couple of hours. This is especially true if you decide to include a discount
      in your abandoned cart reminder. Nothing is more disappointing to a
        Play Seven: Launch Predictive Programs to Convert More Customers          149

customer than to realize they could have gotten a discount on the item
they just purchased. Third, if you send a discount offer too quickly you
may train your customers to expect a discount every time. If customers
can get a discount just by placing an item in a cart and waiting for five
minutes then every customer might do this going forward. That would
have disastrous effects on your margins. Finally, some shoppers don’t
appreciate to be bombarded with marketing messages. Whereas they
might have bought from you that day, if you contact them one too many
times, you might scare them away. As always, it is best to test what works
in your situation.
     The essence of a predictive abandoned cart campaign, as compared
to a regular abandoned cart campaign, is the use of predictive algorithms
to differentiate the offer you send to customers. For customers who have
a very high likelihood to buy you send a simple reminder. However, for
customers with a very low likelihood to buy you can safely include a
discount. You have little to lose because these visitors would not pur-
chase otherwise anyway. You can go one step further and differentiate
the level of discount based on a customer’s historical sensitivity to spe-
cific discount levels. Test the impact of different levels of discount or gifts
as part of the campaign to determine whether offering a discount can
increase your revenue and purchase rates, or if it simply eats into your
profit margins.


Predictive Abandoned Search Campaigns
Unlike abandoned cart campaigns, which are somewhat specific to
online commerce, search and browse abandonment campaigns apply in
all industries. AgilOne research shows that visitors who use a website’s
search functions are six times more likely to make a purchase than
visitors who do not. These visitors are more than just casual browsers.
Don’t lose these potential customers to competitors. You can set up
an abandoned search campaign to remind these customers to return
to your site, to give you a try or to get in touch. Abandoned browse
emails have open rates very similar, or even higher than, abandoned cart
emails, typically in the 30 percent range. Click through rates are about
8 percent. The difference between abandoned cart and abandoned
browse tends to be the conversion rate: about 4 percent for aban-
doned browse and anywhere from 20 to 60 percent for abandoned
150              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      cart campaigns. As a result the revenue per email that you can expect
      from abandoned cart campaigns is about $2.50, but for abandoned
      browse campaigns it is only $0.50. Of course revenue numbers are
      highly dependent on your average order value and the numbers quoted
      are specifically for retail, where the average order value is about $100.
           An abandoned on-site search campaign works just like the aban-
      doned cart campaign. If a website visitor is logged in, an email or
      Facebook advertisement can be sent to the address on file offering rec-
      ommendations similar to or complementary to the searched for items.
      If the visitor is not a logged-in user, cookies can be used to retarget
      them with ads for relevant items.
           Abandoned search campaigns also work for people who come to
      your site using a Google AdWords search. Google AdWords is often one
      of the most expensive marketing channels. Once you have paid for a
      potential customer to click through to your site via an AdWords query,
      it makes sense to do everything possible to convert him or her into a
      customer. The best part about a visitor coming via AdWords is that you
      already have a good idea about what she is interested in buying. Similar
      to the campaigns above, abandoned AdWords searches can be followed
      up with targeted offers enticing the potential customer to come back to
      make a purchase.
           The same recommendations we discussed for abandoned cart
      campaigns apply also to abandoned search campaigns, with respect to
      capturing site visitor information, timing abandonment campaigns, and
      including an offer based on predictive insights. We recommend you
      limit yourself to personalized recommendations and a friendly reminder
      for customers with a very high likelihood to buy and that you include
      an offer or discount for those with a very low likelihood to buy. As with
      abandoned cart campaigns, you may want to wait at least 24 hours before
      sending your reminder or offer, to give customers a chance to complete
      their purchase first and to avoid training them to wait for discounts.


      Predictive Abandoned Browse Campaigns
      Even if you do not have on-site search or if a visitor does not use your
      site’s search feature, you still have the potential to collect data through a
      visitor’s browsing history. AgilOne data shows 96 percent of all website
      visitors leave your site without buying something. Most of these could
       Play Seven: Launch Predictive Programs to Convert More Customers     151

be targeted with reminder advertisements or emails. Compare this to the
number of people who abandon a shopping cart, which is only 8 percent
of all website visitors, or the number of visitors who end up buying
something, which is on average only 4 percent. In other words, there
are 12 times more people you could target with an abandoned browse
campaign than with an abandoned cart campaign. For some companies
an abandoned browse campaign generates even more revenues than an
abandoned cart campaign. Whereas the likelihood to buy is much greater
for abandoned cart shoppers, the volume of abandoned browse shoppers
can, in some cases, more than make up for that.
     When an electronics retailer started to experiment with triggered
emails, they first focused on abandoned cart and post-purchase emails.
They sent about 3,000 post-purchase recommendations daily to those
who had bought something and about 4,000 abandoned cart campaign
emails. The campaigns were very successful. Abandoned cart campaigns
had an open rate of 55 percent and drove an incremental $10,000 in
revenue every day. When this company launched abandoned browse
campaigns they were pleasantly surprised that this campaign was even
more successful. By comparison, they were able to send 100,000 emails
each day! Surprisingly, the emails had an even higher open rate than
the abandoned cart campaign, with a whopping 60 percent of recipi-
ents opening the offer. This abandoned browse campaign alone drove
$40,000 of incremental revenue each day. This is a good example of pre-
dictive marketing in action! Full disclosure: the numbers of this example
have been changed from the original to obfuscate the company, but the
ratios are based on an actual case study.
     Needless to say, the same rules apply to abandoned browse cam-
paigns as to abandoned cart and abandoned search. You can make these
campaigns even more profitable by differentiating your offer based on
likelihood to buy.


Using Look-Alike Targeting
Remarketing only works for known visitors. Remarketing can help you
convert more browsers into buyers and get past buyers to come back
and buy again. However, remarketing cannot help you find and acquire
new consumers for your products, services, or content. This is where
look-alike targeting comes in.
152                 Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

           Look-alike targeting is a predictive analytics technique to find people
      who look just like an initial “seed audience.” For example, if you feed
      a look-alike targeting system, such as Facebook’s look-alike audiences,
      a list of your existing customers, it can find you prospects that have the
      same characteristics as your existing customers. You can now use this
      “look-alike audience” to launch an advertising campaign. The principle
      is not limited to customers. You could feed a look-alike targeting system
      a seed list of people who have liked your Facebook page, and it will
      go out and find people who have a high likelihood to also “like” your
      page. You can also use this principle to find audiences that behave like a
      specific subset of your customers. For example, perhaps you export a list
      of your best, most valuable customers and then advertise only to those
      prospects who “look like” your best customers. Or perhaps you define
      a cluster, which likes leather clothing, and now look for prospects that
      “look like” your leather cluster so you can target very specific advertising
      featuring leather-clad models to this look-alike audience.
           Figure 11.1 illustrates the concept, using Facebook as an example.
      Facebook look-alike targeting is increasingly popular, but Facebook is
      not the only network that gives advertisers the ability to use look-alike
      audiences. Many advertisers, including Twitter, Google Display Net-
      work, and others also offer look-alike audience capabilities.
           On Facebook, you start by uploading a specific list of customers to
      Facebook custom audiences. This can be the list of customers who prefer
      leather products, or perhaps the list of your best customers. Facebook will
      now try to match these records to its user database. Matching happens




      Figure 11.1     Facebook Look-Alike Targeting
       Play Seven: Launch Predictive Programs to Convert More Customers        153

based on email address. The list needs to contain at least 100 records
that match to a Facebook account. After matching at least 100 users,
Facebook now uses their internal algorithms, which also use predictive
analytics, to go out and match your segment to other new people in the
Facebook database that “look like” your original list.
     Look-alike modeling is a powerful tool that enables marketers to
go out and target people who have similar traits or behaviors to their
existing customers or website visitors. Look-alike algorithms typically
need to be fed a list of at least 100 or more existing visitors or customers
as a “seed.”
     Look-alike audiences can be used to support any business objective:
targeting people who are similar to sets of customers for fan acquisition,
site registration, purchases, and coupon claims, or simply to drive aware-
ness of a brand. It can also be used to find audiences who put an item in
the basket of your website but didn’t pay for it.
     Before using look-alike targeting, make sure your seed audience
is clean and well selected or else the look-alike targeting algorithms
will not work. Look-alike targeting is only as good as the inputs are.
Remember, here, too: garbage in, garbage out. Make sure your seed
audience converts really effectively before you expand the seed audi-
ence with look-alike targeting. Go for quality before quantity for your
seed audience. We recommend that you start with a look-alike cam-
paign that is based on your best customers. These are customers that have
bought from you several times and therefore you are sure that these are
quality customers.


Optimizing for Similarity or Reach
Marketers can optimize their look-alike campaigns for “similarity”
or “reach.” When optimizing for similarity, marketers are looking
for impressions with tight accuracy—and presumably better results.
You could say, for example, “with 90 percent certainty, I know that
this person will buy from you.” There will be fewer of these customers
than customers who have, say, a 60 percent chance to buy from you.
When optimizing for “reach” the match is hazier and the ROI lower,
but you might acquire more customers overall.
     On Facebook, you can choose to optimize your audience for “simi-
larity” or “reach” automatically, or to customize something in between.
154              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      When optimized for similarity, a look-alike audience will include the top
      1 percent of people in the selected country who are most similar to the
      seed custom audience. The reach of the new audience will be smaller, but
      the match will be more precise. When optimized for reach, a look-alike
      audience will include the top 5 percent of people in the selected coun-
      try that are similar to the seed custom audience, but with a less precise
      match. Instead of using the types (explained earlier), you can manually
      set a ratio value that represents the top x percent of the audience in
      the selected country. The ratio value should be between 1 percent and
      20 percent and should be specified in intervals of 1 percent. A North
      American Beauty Company used product-based clusters to launch spe-
      cific look-alike advertising campaigns on Facebook. They first uploaded
      a list of all existing customers who were part of a bath and body cluster.
      Then they designed the creative for a Facebook advertising campaign
      specifically to appeal to this type of bath and body customer. This com-
      bination of clustering and look-alike targeting turned out to be highly
      profitable. For the North American Beauty Company, these campaigns
      delivered between 2 and 10 times return, when comparing revenues
      generated to the investment made in Facebook ads.
           As said, look-alike targeting works on many other advertising net-
      works, not just Facebook. The mechanisms for selection and purchasing
      media are similar across networks, and new options become available
      every year.
CHAPTER 12



Play Eight: Launch
Predictive Programs to
Grow Customer Value

I n this chapter we cover examples of programs that can grow cus-
  tomer value and revenues after the initial purchase. We cover specific
campaigns including post-purchase programs, replenishment and repeat
purchase programs, new product introductions, and customer apprecia-
tion programs, and we take a look at loyalty programs and omni-channel
marketing in the age of predictive analytics.


The Secret to Growing Customer Value
The secret to retaining a customer is to start trying to keep the cus-
tomer the day you acquire her. As we discussed in Chapter 7, the most
important concept in marketing is to “give to get.” This applies both
before and after the purchase. The key to creating customer loyalty is
to build value for the customer right from the start of the relationship.
This means the customer must have a great experience from the very
first interaction.




                                                                            155
156                 Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

           The initial transaction is just the beginning of a long relationship
      that needs to be nurtured and developed. Engagement with customers
      should not stop when you convert a prospect into a buyer. If you are able
      to convert new customers into happy customers, you can expect future
      upsell and referral revenues. Expansion revenue—done correctly—
      can be very high-margin revenue because it’s typically lower cost to
      deliver. Referral revenue, too, can be very high margin. Acquiring new
      customers through referrals is cheaper, faster, and more effective than
      through any other means. Referred customers have a shorter sales cycle
      and a higher conversion rate than other customers.
           The concept of growing customer value during the entire customer
      life cycle, both before and after the initial purchase, is visualized in the
      expanded customer funnel of Figure 12.1. Remember, it’s a lot easier to
      get more money from a customer who is happy and already paying you
      than it is to get money for the first time from noncustomers. At a high
      level, the path to customer value is: engagement ==> investment ==>
      offer ==> conversion ==> rinse and repeat.




      Figure 12.1     The Complete Customer Funnel
         Play Eight: Launch Predictive Programs to Grow Customer Value         157

Predictive Post-Purchase Programs
One of the programs you can use to grow customer value from the
start is a predictive post-purchase program. A post-purchase program
is a marketing program triggered by a recent customer purchase.
Examples of post-purchase programs are customer welcome campaigns,
post-purchase recommendations, replenishment campaigns, and repeat
purchase programs. Post-purchase programs are effective since data
shows most customers make a follow-on purchase within a short period
after a purchase when there is a similar need or the brand is still fresh in
the consumer’s mind.

Customer Welcome Campaigns
The simplest form of a post-purchase program is a new customer
welcome campaign. In retail, our research shows that if a customer
buys only once, the chances that they will come back a second time are
only 30 percent on average. However, if you can get that customer to
buy a second time, the odds increase significantly. Seventy percent of
two-time buyers will come back again. This means that marketers need
to act quickly to reengage new customers and to get one-time buyers to
become two-time buyers. A new customer welcome message—either
via email or direct mail—is an easy and effective way to build loyalty
with new customers and build on their early excitement to encourage
them to make a second purchase. A welcome email can see open rates of
35 percentage or greater and purchase rates greater than 10 percentage.
These rates are right in between abandoned cart and abandoned browse
campaigns discussed in the previous chapter.
     The new customer welcome campaign should thank the new cus-
tomer, welcome them to your brand, and should include a personalized
offer to encourage a subsequent purchase. Free shipping for a limited
period of time or a free gift with the next purchase can work well with
certain segments of customers. Engaging customers in reviews and shar-
ing with friends and colleagues are also effective ways to start building
relationships.
     A more sophisticated version of a new customer welcome can
involve a series of emails over a period of time. For instance, a company
might send welcome, thank you, or follow-up emails one day, one week,
and one month after purchase. The optimal timing and messaging of
158              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      each campaign can vary by company and industry, so be sure test which
      combinations provide the best results for your company. Introducing
      them to other categories, additional services, or even uses and care for
      the product they just bought are all great ways to continue to build
      relationship with the customer.
           Predictive analytics can be used to improve the success of your wel-
      come program. If you can predict the future value of a customer at the
      time of their first purchase, you can tailor your welcome campaign with
      personalized offers geared to different segments. For high-potential or
      high-value buyers, it is worth a lot of money to get them to come back,
      so you need to carefully craft a set of communications and offers and pay
      special attention to this segment. These customers expect a higher level
      of service, and for most brands it is important to differentiate treatment
      of this segment specifically.
           Online services companies—like California-based online home
      cleaning service company Homejoy—excel at providing best-in-class
      first experiences and welcome messaging to increase customer loyalty
      renewal. Homejoy developed a comprehensive welcome program to
      ensure “100% Satisfaction Guaranteed” and drive people who tested the
      services to their second booking. The company sends a series of person-
      alized campaigns at key moments in the customer journey: a traditional
      welcome email right after the first online booking, a text reminder on
      the customer’s mobile phone three days before the appointment, a text
      with a special service phone number during the appointment, and a
      feedback email. One month after the appointment, a personalized fol-
      low up email is sent with the first name of the client and the name of the
      house cleaner with a special offer. By using different channels to reach
      customers, Homejoy goes above and beyond the client’s expectations
      and increases the customer’s likelihood to stick to the brand.
           Direct mail is also making a comeback for welcome campaigns. Lilly
      Pulitzer sends oversized postcards on high-quality matte paper to every
      new customer who bought through their e-commerce site. The creative
      is personalized using the first name of the customer. Variable printing
      techniques are now available to allow for text or images to be changed
      piece by piece without slowing down the printing process. In the case
      of Lilly, the offer of the welcome campaign is a “present with your
      next purchase” to get the first-time customer to make that coveted
      second purchase.
         Play Eight: Launch Predictive Programs to Grow Customer Value       159

Post-Purchase Recommendations
Not only new customers should get a follow-up message after their pur-
chase. The same is true for any purchase, whether made for a first-time
or a returning customer. After each message, send customers a thank you
note and use the opportunity to suggest tips to enjoy the new product or
service. You can also present them with relevant offers or product rec-
ommendations for future purchases at this time. Post-purchase emails are
just as successful as welcome emails, and much more successful than any
kind of blast message you send. Open rates tend to be over 30 percent
and the conversion rate is close to 8 percent.
     For consumers, the decision whether to include an offer in the
post-purchase message could be based on the value of the customer.
You should invest more in getting higher value customers to come back.
For business marketing, the post-purchase program should not focus on
the next sell, but rather on providing guidance and advice on how to
get the most out of their initial purchases. Remember, the customer
will only choose to buy more from you if the initial purchase delivers its
expected value. Therefore, until business customers have received value
from your solution, focus on getting those customers to value, rather
than making next sell recommendations.

Replenishment Campaigns and Repeat Purchase Programs
If your company sells products that have an expiration or natural
replenishment cycle, such as trash bags or printer toner, send a message
to remind your customers to renew or replenish. You may have noticed
that Amazon now has a “buy it again” button and prominently features
products with short product lifetimes on your personalized homepage.
Amazon and other retailers also give shoppers discounts for recurring
orders and offer subscription services. Replenishment reminders are
among the most powerful marketing programs out there because
consumers perceive well-timed reminders as great customer service,
and our research shows that purchase rates can be four times that of
any other campaign. Replenishment campaigns are the best performing
of any life cycle marketing campaign. This means that open rates are
between twenty and fifty percent and purchase rates may be as high as
thirty percent as well. For many customers, replenishment reminders
are a welcome customer service.
160              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

           Timing really matters when it comes to repeat purchase reminders.
      There is likely an average repeat purchase time frame for each of the
      products and services you carry. However, to increase repeat purchase
      conversion further, you would need to predict the repeat purchase win-
      dow for every customer. Products like packaged food items may be
      consumed at different rates by different customers, but by tracking the
      rate of purchase for each customer, you can predict the best time to
      send reminders for different groups of customers. Replenishment timing
      can be set in a combination of three ways: manually set by the mer-
      chant, wisdom of the crowd looking at average replenishment timing
      across all customers, or by looking at individual replenishment cycles
      from the past. Manual and wisdom of the crowd are good approxima-
      tions but are no substitute for customer level data because customers may
      use your product at different rates. For example a beauty salon buying
      a specific shampoo might need to refill every week, whereas a regu-
      lar consumer only needs a refill for the same item every three months.
      Therefore, the most successful strategy is to use customer data when
      available, then resort to wisdom of the crowd, then ultimately manual
      entry by the merchant, who can make an educated guess.
           An international shoe retailer tested replenishment campaigns on
      its top-selling products. At first glance replenishment fits better with
      consumables than shoes, but it turns out that shoes wear out at fairly
      predictable times and loyalists can be persuaded to buy from the brand
      again. In one such “shoe replenishment campaign” the brand recom-
      mended shoes to clients who had purchased exactly 18 months ago, and
      to a random control group. The open rate of the repurchase email was
      5 points higher for the test group, visits to the website per email sent were
      15% higher and product views per visit were 19% higher. Replenishment
      email campaigns proved to be very effective for this brand to create
      upsell opportunities and to reactivate customers with relevant content.
      The same retailer sent a successful campaign to parents who bought shoes
      for their children also, a specific segment with a frequent need for new
      pairs as they grow up.

      New Product Introductions
      When companies release new products or features, they often forget
      to advertise these new products or capabilities to their existing cus-
      tomer base. By using customer segmentation and predictive algorithms,
         Play Eight: Launch Predictive Programs to Grow Customer Value        161

marketers can now predict which of their existing customers would be
interested in more niche products or feature introductions. And nothing
creates a more compelling reason to buy than new product introductions.
     The same strategy can also be used to promote leftover merchandise
or broken inventory. Let’s say you have only sizes 6 and 12 of a popular
dress that has sold out of other sizes. There is no point in sending a pro-
motion for this product to your entire database. However, if you could
pinpoint those consumers who are interested in such dresses and wear a
size 6 or 12, you have a highly relevant and powerful campaign.
     A New York–based publisher wanted to improve the results of its
New Releases Newsletters with better targeting. The original segmen-
tation this client used was based on genre preferences that customers
declared when they subscribed to the newsletters. The company then
created dynamic clusters that were based on the actual purchasing and
browsing activity of the subscribers. The question: which will turn out
to be more accurate, what consumers say they are interested in (pref-
erences), or what they show they are interested in through their actions
(clusters). It turns out that deciding which genre newsletter to send to
whom based on clusters had a two-time better open rate, a four-time
better click-through-rate and a seven time higher click through rate than
those sent based on the consumers’ self-stated preferences. The conclu-
sion: it is equally, if not more, important to observe what people do as
compared to what they say.


Customer Appreciation Campaigns
It is easy to forget your best customers. These best customers can
make up a significant portion of revenue and nearly all of your profits.
On average, we have seen 60-plus percent of revenue and 90-plus percent
of profits come from about 20 percent of customers. We’ve met some
forward-thinking CMO’s who focus exclusively on their best customers.
These customers are the lifeblood of the company, and there are many
things you can do to reward your high-value customers. These rewards
don’t always have to involve money. For instance, you could give high-
value customers a preview of your new collection or invite them to your
headquarters for a tour. Likewise, your CEO could recognize them with
a personal email, call, or handwritten note, or you could give VIPs access
to a special customer service phone number or section of your store.
162              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      It might also be wise to recognize these customers more formally such
      as with a token gift during the holidays. One of our customers had a
      company event where they had a famous singer give a concert. They also
      invited their platinum customers to this event. It was exclusive and
      provided their customers an amazing benefit that money cannot buy.
      They talked about this in public forums and encouraged other customers
      to become brand loyalists.
          Before you can reward valuable customers, you first need to
      deeply understand them. Not all valuable customers are created equal.
      Customers can be loyal in at least four different ways:

      1. Customers have been doing business with you for a long time.
      2. Customers spend significantly with your brand.
      3. Customers buy from many different categories.
      4. Customers refer or influence a friend or colleague.

           Although all of these customers are valuable, each is loyal in a dif-
      ferent way and would require a different program to engage with them.
           Similarly, when a retailer of outdoor goods and apparel wanted to
      better understand its most valuable customers, it used software algorithms
      to find different types of valuable shopping patterns that people might
      have missed. It identified four very different high-value personas that all
      behaved very differently:

      1. Big-big-but-do-not-return: One group of customers made single, large
         orders, but never returned to buy more after the initial purchase.
         This group likes adult outerwear, as well as high-ticket items like tents
         and strollers. They buy high-end brands and tend to live in wealthier
         states like New York, California, or New Jersey. These customers
         tend to be acquired through advertisements featured on vendor
         websites during busy shopping times such as the holidays.
      2. Reward addict: The second group of valuable customers has a reason-
         ably large average order value but not as large as the big-big-group.
         However, this group buys much more frequently, almost once every
         two months like clockwork. These customers are high revenue but
         lower margin because they use a lot of rewards points, will not hesi-
         tate to return things, and will frequently buy items during clearance
          Play Eight: Launch Predictive Programs to Grow Customer Value         163

   sales. These customers buy from the website and tend to be male,
   young (30–40), and live in less-populated states. These customers
   buy outerwear, sleeping bags, tents, and climbing gear.
3. Old school: Old-school customers like to buy from stores, come shop-
   ping on weekends, and will often buy items on clearance. Old-school
   buyers have an affinity to the footwear category. They like different
   brands than other valuable segments, and for the most part live close
   to the company stores. The old-school customers tend to be acquired
   first in December through pay per click campaigns.
4. Fallen from grace: The last valuable customer segment discovered is
   called “fallen from grace.” This group of customers typically starts
   out amazing with more than three orders in their first two months
   and a great average order value that is almost double the average for
   the company. However, these customers often stop buying after a few
   months and have a higher propensity to return items.

     Once you understand the different types of valuable customers, you
can start to design campaigns to keep these segments engaged. For the
old-school customer segment, you may want to invest in a direct mail
or even clienteling campaign whereby VIP customers receive a post-
card or phone call alerting them to new footwear models they might
like. For the Big-big-but-do-not-return segment, perhaps you can send an
annual Christmas gift that is an add-on to their tent or stroller, such as a
high-quality water bottle they can take on walks or camping adventures.


Loyalty Programs in the Age of Predictive Analytics
Loyalty programs are designed to turn customers into loyal advocates
who support and recommend your brand. Consumer marketers have
long used loyalty programs to try to move customers along on the
customer loyalty continuum.
     Retail loyalty programs evolved when progressive retailers recog-
nized that without a “customer identification tool,” they were unable
to recognize individual customers and reward them for desired behavior.
While retail loyalty programs have many purposes, the greatest value that
is created for retailers is this ability to identify individual customers and
to measure and understand their individual behaviors. This consumer
164              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      behavior data far outweighs the currency value of providing consumers
      the opportunity to build a reward opportunity by shopping at one par-
      ticular store. This opportunity is often misunderstood.
           Bolstered by the initial success, Mavi—the apparel company featured
      in Chapters 1 and 3—also used predictive analytics to bolster its loyalty
      program. Mavi implemented a loyalty card as early as 2008. Eighty-five
      percent of its revenues now runs through this loyalty program, and more
      than 90 percent of all products bought in the store can be traced back
      to a specific customer. This is very important to being able to see the
      complete customer picture. Mavi decided to use loyalty points to try and
      increase the average order value of a customer’s first order. For example,
      customers spending an average of $100 would receive a message say-
      ing “come spend $150 and get extra points.” To another group that
      normally spends $300 it would say, “come spend $400 and get extra
      points.” Not only did the program increase the value of the first order, it
      also drove repeat visits. Customers now had points to spend and would
      come for a second visit to do this. Often they would spend more money
      than they had points for. And the average number of visits per customer
      increased from 1.2 to 2.1 as a result of this program. The program is so
      successful that half of the company’s discount budget is now allocated to
      this card program.
           Loyalty programs are making a comeback in ways that would not
      have been possible just a few years ago. First, online purchases and behav-
      ior can be tracked even without consumers signing up for formal loy-
      alty programs. Zappos now recognizes VIP customers automatically and
      greets them accordingly on their website. You don’t even have to wait for
      a VIP customer to spend a lot with you to recognize this group. Thanks
      to big data and predictive analytics it is only now possible to identify
      behaviors that point to a customer becoming a VIP in the future so you
      can treat them with white gloves from day one. To identify shoppers in
      the store, without enrolling them into a formal program, retailers have
      started to use e-receipts, newsletter signups or free wifi as ways to capture
      shopper information and later identify shoppers in the store.
           Second, the days of one-size-fits-all loyalty programs are rapidly com-
      ing to an end. Instead of offering the same incentives to all customers,
      offers can and should now be customized on a person-by-person basis.
         Play Eight: Launch Predictive Programs to Grow Customer Value        165

As the Mavi example showed, the best loyalty programs are tailored to
drive specific actions from specific customers.
     Third, although loyalty programs have historically focused on
rewarding purchases of goods or services, marketers are increasingly
looking to reward behaviors that they know will eventually lead to sales.
For instance, the rewards program of online flash sale site Gilt awards
points to customers who are browsing its website, referring friends,
or connecting to its Facebook Timeline because it found that more
browsing almost always leads to more buying. (Source: Gilt.com website
Insider Program.) In a way, loyalty is both influencing and influenced
by customer engagement. More engaged customers certainly means
more loyal customers.
     An example of a creative and modern loyalty program is the
PowerUp Rewards™ program of the company GameStop, which sells
new and pre-owned game consoles and software and is expanding into
mobile devices. PowerUp Rewards members receive many perks that
aren’t “points,” such as pre-owned promotional and trade programs,
exclusive midnight launch deals, consumer electronics specials, and great
prizes to solidify the company’s position as the destination for all things
gaming. Members are also automatically entered into monthly Epic
Reward Giveaways™ when they make a transaction with GameStop.
Epic Reward Giveaways are unique and exciting once-in-a-lifetime
experiences that GameStop created based on their strong relationships
with gaming publishers and other entertainment partners. GameStop
hosted more than 5,000 PowerUp Rewards members at their second
annual GameStop Expo in Las Vegas. With more than 200,000 square
feet of video gaming excitement and innovation, customers experienced
the features of the new Microsoft Xbox One and Sony PlayStation4
consoles before they launched, played the hottest new video games,
entered to win great prizes, and met with top video game publishers
and other celebrity guests.
     Just three years since launch, the PowerUp Rewards program had
27 million members in the PowerUp Rewards program, approximately
7 million of which were paid members. The program’s paid mem-
berships may also include a subscription to Game Informer magazine,
additional discounts on pre-owned merchandise in stores, and additional
166              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      credit on trade-ins of pre-owned products. Game Informer digital edition
      has grown to over 3 million subscribers across 15 countries worldwide,
      making it the largest digital magazine in the world.
          The program has been very successful for GameStop. PowerUp
      Rewards members shop with GameStop approximately 5 times more
      often than nonmembers, accounting for 71% of total U.S. purchases
      in 2013. Also, the consumer data that GameStop collects through
      the program allows them to make informed strategic decisions about
      anything from real estate selection, marketing programs, and efficient
      product purchasing decisions (Source: GameStop 2013 Annual Report.)


      A Word about Omni-Channel Marketing
      A growing percentage of shoppers engage with you using multiple chan-
      nels, and many shoppers migrate from one channel to another over their
      lifetime to become multichannel shoppers. At least twenty-eight percent
      of shoppers who first buy online migrate to also buy in the store over
      time, and twenty-two percent of those who start in the store migrate
      to also buy online. These percentages are likely grossly understated as
      most marketers still struggle to identify in-store shoppers. Omni-channel
      behavior represents a special challenge and opportunity for marketers.
      As we discussed in Chapter 3, the challenge is to create truly complete
      customer profiles. The opportunity is to use customer data to drive
      in-store customers online and online shoppers into your stores. Also,
      when it comes to predicting customer lifetime value, the number of
      channels customers use is always a very important predictive variable,
      given everything else left constant.
           The role of your various channels isn’t always obvious. Let’s look
      again at the example of GameStop. Rated as one of the top 25 retailers
      (ComScore Data), GameStop.com brings virtual store shelves to more
      than 9 million unique visitors to the site each month. Initially it was
      looking at its website as a source of direct e-commerce and revenues.
      However it turned out that more than 60% of store shoppers visit the
      GameStop web or mobile sites prior to making a purchase inside the
      stores, and for every $1 of online sales, the web and mobile channels
      influence ten times that amount in their stores. The company has
      launched other innovative omni-channel experiences as well that drive
      customer loyalty. The GameStop web-in-store service guarantees every
          Play Eight: Launch Predictive Programs to Grow Customer Value         167

game is in stock by giving customers the choice to order any product
online while in a store and have it shipped directly to them for no
charge. The pick-up@store service allows customers to shop for games,
systems, and accessories online and pick them up at their local store
(Source: GameStop 2013 Annual Report.)
     As long as you have the physical address of a customer in your
database, you can use direct mail, email, web, or social campaigns to alert
all your customers, online and offline, to new store openings, in-store
events, or in-store promotions. A company that used this strategy suc-
cessfully is 100% Pure, an organic cosmetics brand founded in 2005 as an
online-only store and has since grown rapidly to 12 stores in three states.
Last year the company sold more than 7 million products. This company’s
marketing team is small. 100% Pure interacts with customers across mul-
tiple channels, but its web sales account for nearly half its total business.
     100% Pure used predictive marketing to promote its brand across
channels: using customer data from its online store, 100% Pure was able
to analyze every region in the United States to determine where most
of its customers were located. It found that most customers were located
in California, followed by New York, Florida, and Texas. This helped
the company decipher where to open its next seven stores.
     Once it opened the new stores, it needed a way to drive online
customers into the stores. Using predictive analytics models, it targeted
existing customers with a high propensity to buy with direct mail to
drive traffic to its nearest stores. The company saw a revenue lift of 163
percent. For one specific store grand opening, the company sent invita-
tions to select customers who lived within a 50-mile radius of the store
and that it had identified as having a greater propensity to buy and a
high lifetime value. It then sent an email reminder to those customers
two days before the opening. The store saw sales increase seven times its
average daily sales.
     One of 100% Pure’s greatest success stories with predictive marketing
was a campaign around its best-selling coffee bean eye cream. Because
the product is a 60-day supply, the company used AgilOne to trigger an
email at 45 days to invite the customer to repurchase the item online or
in store. The company saw a 200 percent average sales lift.
CHAPTER 13



Play Nine: Launch
Predictive Programs to
Retain More Customers

I n this chapter, we will look closer at the definition of loyalty and churn,
  and cover specific customer retention strategies including customer
appreciation campaigns, proactive and reactive churn management, and
customer reactivation campaigns.


Understanding Your Retention Rate
The retention rate of your customers is defined as the percentage of
customers that you retain during the measurement period. There are
at least two ways to measure retention: you can focus on the percent-
age of customers you retain or on the percentage of dollars you retain.
We recommend you focus on dollar value retention. This overcomes the
challenge of having great retention metrics at a customer count level and
still having an unhealthy business. The way you do this is by understand-
ing the retention rate of your customers by value segment they belong
to, as described in Chapter 8.




                                                                                169
170              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      The Concept of Negative Churn
      Negative churn is the concept of growing revenue from existing cus-
      tomers at a rate faster than the rate at which other customers stop buying
      your products or services.
           When customers stop buying your products and can no longer be
      counted as customers, it’s easy to think that the lost revenue will have to
      be replaced with sales from new customers and just focus on acquiring
      new customers. However, that approach doesn’t take the whole picture
      into account. What you should really be looking at is the total value of
      all revenue going in and out of your business, rather than the number of
      customers you are gaining and losing. That’s because certain customers
      could be generating more revenue by buying more products and using
      more of your services, boosting total revenue above the amount of lost
      revenue from lapsed customers.
           To get to the concept of negative churn we have to move from
      counting the number of customers that leave us to counting the num-
      ber of dollars that leave. You may lose some customers (and the revenue
      dollars that come with those lost customers), but if you do your job well
      you will gain many expansion or repeat revenue dollars from other, more
      loyal customers.
           For example, if you lose $100 through customer attrition and nonre-
      newals, but you gain $150 for the same period or cohort through expan-
      sion revenue (upsells, cross-sells, higher usage, etc.) you have negative
      (net) churn of $50. On a customer-basis (but still considering revenue),
      if out of 100 customers you lose 10 (gross), but you are able to upsell,
      cross-sell, or drive additional usage from the 90 customers that are still
      there, allowing you to generate more revenue from the 90 than you did
      the original 100, you have a negative churn rate.
           When a company is in early stages of growth with just a few
      million dollars in revenue, customer churn is not necessarily a big
      concern. It seems easy to replace customer revenue with new customers.
      However, as revenue grows, replacing revenue lost to churn often means
      tens of millions of dollars that need to come from new customers.
      The benefit of focusing early on customer retention and achieving
      negative churn (when upsell revenue is greater than lost revenue) is that
      the revenue from your existing customers compounds over time just like
      retirement savings.
           Play Nine: Launch Predictive Programs to Retain More Customers          171

Understanding Your Business Model
Some industries have inherently higher retention rates than others.
In retail, retention rates tend to be very low, typically well below 30 per-
cent. In automotive, no more than 40 percent of buyers ever purchase the
same car on two successive occasions. In industries where the relationship
between the customer and the firm is more complex, such as in business
software or banking, retention rates can be well above 90 percent.
It is no surprise then that the retail industry has been an early adopter
of predictive marketing, in a quest to increase customer loyalty and
customer lifetime value.
     Figure 13.1 outlines some of the different marketing environments
created by different business models. These environments have differ-
ent requirements for customer programs, due to their unique nature
of their products, supply chain, selling models, and customer decision
cycles. For example repeat purchase and replenishment campaigns are
more important for those products that have a short product lifetime
and/or a short product replacement cycle.


                                              SKU
                                              Replace- Product
Type of          Typical                      ment     Usage
Business         Industries     # SKUs        Cycle    Lifetime       Margin
Fashion        Electronics,     High       Short        Medium        Varied
                  apparel       (1,000+)                (1–3 years)   (10%–60%)
Replenishment/ Food, drug,      Low-Medium Medium       Short         High
   Versioned      cosmetics,    (50–2,000)              (<6 years)    (35%–65%)
                  CPG
Considered     White goods,     Low           Medium    Very Long     Low-Medium
                  auto          (10–50)                 (>5 years)    (15%–-35%)
Subscription   Subscription     Very low      Low       Medium        High
                  consumer      (<10)
                  services,
                  home
                  services
Basics         Books,           Medium        Low       Medium        Low
                  electrical
                  tools

Figure 13.1    Business Models
172              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      Not All Churn Is Created Equal
      When measuring customer retention, it is important to realize that not
      all churn is created equal. For example, churn on new customers is always
      higher than it is for customers who have already proven to be loyal and
      who have come back to do business with you more than once. It is
      important to understand these differences. Let’s look at an example. You
      are the head of marketing for a hypothetical golf course called GolfGear.
      Your CEO has read some industry reports and shows you the following
      data: The churn rate of GolfGear is 15 percent as compared to 5 percent
      for competitors. She then adds that even though GolfGear’s growth rate
      is satisfactory, retention rates are dismal.
           Although this seems to make sense on the surface, the reality can be
      more nuanced. It turns out the retention rates of GolfGear are exactly in
      line with the industry average. However, because GolfGear is growing
      so quickly, a relatively larger percentage of the customer population is
      brand new. Because churn on new customers tends to be much higher
      than on older customers, the aggregate retention rate for GolfGear is
      lower (see Figure 13.2).
           You could dig in a little deeper. When you are losing customers, who
      are you losing? Not all churn is equally bad. All brands have unprofitable
      customers. Losing an unprofitable customer is not nearly as bad as losing
      one of your best customers. Let us look at a large retailer. The retailer is
      experiencing a decline in the number of active customers and a decline
      in revenues (see Figure 13.3).
           To truly understand the root cause for the decline this retailer decided
      to look at the churn by customer value segment (see Figure 13.4).
      The overall churn rate observed was 22 percent, but it turns out that the
      retailer is losing lower lifetime value customers. Churn is highest among
      those customers spending less than $1,000 at 34 percent. For customers

                    GolfGear                                 Competition
                     Population     Churn                       Population    Churn
      Tenure            (%)        Rate (%)    Tenure              (%)       Rate (%)
      0–4 months        30%          30%       0–4 months           5%         30%
      5–12 months       25%          10%       5–12 months         10%         10%
      1–2 years         40%           5%       1–2 years           50%          5%
      3+ years           5%           2%       3+ years            35%          2%

      Figure 13.2   Example of GolfGear Churn Rate Details
        Play Nine: Launch Predictive Programs to Retain More Customers   173




Figure 13.3   Declining Customer Count, but Increasing Aov




Figure 13.4   Decline in Low-Value, Not High-Value Customers
174              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      spending between $1,000 and $10,000 the churn rate is significantly
      lower, namely 15 percent. For medium-to-large spenders between
      $10,000 and $50,000, the customer base is fairly stable with a small
      decline of 1 percent. However, it turns out that this retailer is succeeding
      in attracting 16 percent more big spenders, who spend more than
      $50,000 with the company, which is 50 times more than the lowest
      value segment. As a result, this retailer may very well be increasing its
      profitability even though the number of active customers is declining
      and its revenue is decreasing.


      Value Migration Is Also Churn
      As we outlined in Chapter 8, you do not need to actually lose customers
      to lose money. The most overlooked aspect of churn is value migration.
      Value migration happens when customers spend less money with you in
      a given year than they did in the previous year.
          Let’s look at the example of a retail bank. This bank was measuring
      customer gains and customer churn year over year and found that both
      were stable over time with a growth rate of 5 percent and a churn rate
      of 4.1 percent. Yet this bank was experiencing a significant decline in
      revenue. It turns out that the average balance held in the bank by its
      2 million customers was declining at 2 percent each year.
          The management of this bank initially pressured the marketing team
      to focus on improving customer churn. However, a simple profitability
      analysis found that the effect of value migration, in the form of declining
      bank balances, was much greater than the impact of customer churn.
      In fact, of the lost revenue due to value, migration was three times larger
      than the lost revenue due to account closings. Once they understood
      the reasons behind the decline in revenues, the bank could take steps
      to turn the situation around. It focused the team on combatting value
      migration, not just account closings, and created a separate customer
      segment to monitor the behavior of the declining segment.


      Churn Management Programs
      Churn management programs can be untargeted, applying equally to all
      your customers, or targeted. Churn management can also be reactive
      or proactive. Untargeted churn management could be making general
         Play Nine: Launch Predictive Programs to Retain More Customers      175




Figure 13.5   Overview of Churn Management Programs


improvements to service or product quality or undertaking a mass adver-
tising campaign. Targeted churn programs can be reactive, triggered by
a customer canceling their service, for example, and proactive, based on
predictions of customers at risk (see Figure 13.5). Another name for
proactive churn management is retention management.
     The advantage of reactive churn management is that you only incur
a cost for customers who are actually churning. The downside is that
you may be too late. The advantage of proactive churn management is
that you will likely save more customers because you reach customers
before they have made their final decision to leave you. The downside is
that you may train your customers to always be looking for deals.


Proactive Retention Management
It is much easier, cheaper, and more effective to try and prevent a cus-
tomer from leaving than it is to save a customer last-minute or to reac-
tivate that customer after she has already stopped shopping with you.
     Central Desktop helps people work together in ways they never
imagined possible through its web-based collaboration platform. Usage
data was stored in disparate systems, making it difficult to identify cus-
tomers who weren’t fully using the software. Central Desktop’s services
team needed early visibility into thousands of accounts at a time so they
could proactively reach out to those at-risk customers.
     Mark Fordham, vice president of services, and Katie Gaston,
community and operations manager, led the charge in implementing
technology to uncover customer insights and become increasingly
176               Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      forward-thinking as a department. First, they pinpointed key indicators
      of accounts at risk of unsubscribing. For example, they uncovered
      five key features that indicate customer “stickiness” and retention.
      Customers who use at least two of these five key features turned out
      to have a 40 percent higher retention rate than customers who use
      none or only one of these features. Central Desktop now proactively
      promotes these specific product capabilities to all customers from day
      one to increase retention. Additionally, Central Desktop is now able to
      send highly targeted and personalized emails to the specific users who
      haven’t used all capabilities of the company’s collaboration tool.
          Ultimately, predictive analytics combined with proactive customer
      outreach has proven to be a winning strategy for Central Desktop: its
      overall churn rate went down by 10 percentage points in just more than
      one year. Predictive models can indicate which customers and contacts
      have a low likelihood to make a future purchase. Predictive models can
      also flag customers who are abusing the system. Rather than just letting
      these customers go, you can use preventative touch campaigns to check
      in with customers at risk. In consumer marketing that could mean send-
      ing a simple reminder, a relevant or compelling offer—a personalized
      recommendation, a discount, a gift, or an invitation to an upcoming sale
      or event. An example of a preventative touch campaign could be sending
      contacts with a low likelihood to buy but a high predicted lifetime value
      (LTV) an offer for 20 percent off their next purchase.
          In business marketing, proactive retention management can be as
      simple as giving the customer a call at the right time to offer help. Let’s say
      you are a vendor of online software. There could be many reasons that
      customers are disengaging. Perhaps the primary end user has left and the
      new team doesn’t understand the value of the software, or doesn’t know
      how to use it. Perhaps your customer is experiencing performance issues
      with your software but hasn’t taken steps to call you for help. Perhaps
      the customer has a feature request. There are a thousand reasons, many
      of which are preventable and solvable, that a customer is dissatisfied.
      The problem is that customers may not always realize their problems are
      solvable, and you may not realize when customers have a problem.
          If you use predictive analytics, you can watch for early warning
      signs that a customer is unhappy and check in accordingly. Warning
      signals could be declining visits to your website or email opens, or
      simply declining consumption of your products or services. For software
      products, if a customer logs fewer usage sessions than usual that could
         Play Nine: Launch Predictive Programs to Retain More Customers         177

be a sign. By looking at the behavior of thousands of customers who
have churned, software algorithms can identify what is common about
customer behavior prior to canceling their service and alert you if new
customers are exhibiting this concerning behavior. The end result can
be magical. Nothing is more delightful for a customer than to receive
a proactive call from a customer service representative when they
are experiencing trouble. In fact, it is not unusual for these unhappy
customers to be so thankful that they turn into lifetime customers once
you have resolved their issues.

How Much to Spend to Save Customers?
When it comes to churn management, an important question to ask is
what is the maximum dollar value of the retention incentive you can
offer for the program to be profitable. How much money you can offer
depends on the lifetime value of the at-risk customers, the targeting
effectiveness (can you accurately identify the churn rate risk of a spe-
cific, target segment), and the program effectiveness (churn rate in a
target segment).
     Let’s look at an example. A recent cellular network failure in a certain
region has led to many complaints at your call center. You suspect this is
having an impact on churn. You discover that in fact the churn is very
high—around 10 percent—among customers who called to complain in
the past month. So about 10 percent of customers who called in January
ended up churning in February.
     These churning customers are very valuable and carry a $250 average
lifetime value. So you want to create a proactive program to lower churn
among complaining customers. You design a program to call these cus-
tomers who have recently complained and apologize for poor service.
You also offer them a financial incentive to upgrade to a better service
the next month. If you know the program can reduce churn from 10
percent to 5 percent, then you could spend up to $12.50 on the retention
of each customer.
     The general formula to calculate this is:

X = Y (%)∗LTV
X = the money you can spend to try to retain each customer
Y = the percentage of customers that you can save with your campaign
LTV = the lifetime value of each saved customer
178              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

           The trick is that in real life you don’t actually know what Y is, but
      you can find Y by testing your program at a smaller scale. All you know
      when you get started is that the maximum improvement in retention is
      10 percent (the rate of churn) so the maximum amount of money to
      spend in this particular case is $25.
           The right way to develop a proactive churn management program
      is to first find customers to proactively target. The way to do this is
      to develop hypotheses on customer variables that are related to churn.
      Then you design a test program for these at-risk customers. Make sure
      to split your target segment in two or more groups, including a holdout
      group that will not receive a retention incentive. Only testing can ulti-
      mately quantify how much churn reduction will result, or what level of
      redemption will happen on incentives. These learnings can be used to
      refine the program.


      Retention and Share of Wallet
      It appears that growing the number of products and services that
      somebody buys from you may also increase the retention rate of that
      customer. The more effort the customer invests to tell you about them-
      selves, the greater their stake in making the relationship work. This is a
      well-known strategy for telecommunications providers. The churn rates
      on customers who are subscribed only to cable television services is
      more than double that of customers who buy their television, Internet,
      and phone service from the same provider, as outlined in a paper titled
      “Does Service Bundling Reduce Churn?” by Jeffrey Prince and Shane
      Greenstein (November 2011).
          AgilOne data shows that the same principle applies across other
      industries: retail customers who buy different categories of products
      from a given brand have higher retention rates than those customers
      who just buy a single product type. Therefore, all marketers should aim
      to increase the number of product types customers buy as a proactive
      retention strategy.


      Identifying the Root Cause of Churn
      There may be several reasons the customers are not getting the bene-
      fit from the product or service they have bought. Identifying the root
         Play Nine: Launch Predictive Programs to Retain More Customers       179

cause of churn is a best practice when it comes to proactive retention
management. Perhaps customers are experiencing product issues: the
product frustrates them—poor fit, bugs, data loss, slow performance,
irritating user interface. If this is the case, you need to solve the prod-
uct issues first, or update your merchandising strategy. Perhaps customers
are experiencing poor customer service when they call in to get help.
Perhaps the customer bought the right product and you are delivering
good customer service but they do not know how to use it. In business
marketing this often occurs when there is a change in the guard and the
new users and sponsors are not familiar with your product.
     Whatever the root cause, identifying underlying reasons and improv-
ing them can significantly increase your retention rates. Through pre-
dictive analytics algorithms you can score each customer’s likelihood to
churn, as well as identify and rank order the factors that contribute to
the churn score.
     A consumer services company was able to improve their retention
by ten percent through following steps: First, build a model to pre-
dict which customers are likely to churn, and score each customer daily
using this model. Second, inspect the model to understand factors that
drive the churn score and strategize around actions to take. Third, test
the effectiveness of different customer treatment methods. Some fac-
tors that were driving churn were the number of calls the customer
had to make to the call center regarding trouble with their service,
equipment, delivery time, and a sensitivity to price. Customers who
were vocal about the issues they were having were then called back,
treated courteously, and offered a discount on equipment maintenance
or on service if they extended their contracts further. For the customers
who were sensitive to price, but were longtime, loyal, valuable cus-
tomers, the company proactively called them a few weeks before their
contract ended. The call center representatives discussed their current
contract price versus the market rate and worked with the customer
to ensure they would extend the price they were comfortable with.
Naturally—the amount of effort and discount spent to retain the cus-
tomers was always proportional to how valuable the customer had been
in the past; or if they were a new customer proportional to their predicted
lifetime value.
     A subscription-based research firm set out to improve retention of
their customers. They needed to know the following: Can we predict
180               Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      the probability that a given customer will renew the annual subscription?
      More over, if a customer is at risk of churning, what are the contribut-
      ing reasons (e.g., because the customer is not using x, and the firm
      didn’t do y)? Lastly, what levers does the firm have to increase retention
      for each customer at risk, and which of these are the most cost effec-
      tive? The company analyzed the interactions between customers and the
      firm’s primary products, such as search activity and the consumption of
      online research by customers, email and phone conversations with the
      firm, etc. A major insight was that consistent engagement of the cus-
      tomer with the content was more important than just raw volume of
      content consumption. So a customer that consumes content in a few
      big bursts is less likely to renew than a customer who consistently con-
      sumes even small amounts of content. The firm now has a consistent
      effort to engage each customer at least once a month with relevant con-
      tent. Delivery of relevant content recommendation by automated emails
      turned out to be a very cost-effective retention lever. These emails uti-
      lized automated recommendation engines to push relevant content—for
      example: a customer who read specific content would get an email with
      links to related content. Some high-cost levers (such as consultation calls
      with an expert rep) are very effective retention levers but should only be
      used for "premium" customers.


      Customer Reactivation Campaigns
      When a customer leaves you, not all is lost. AgilOne data shows that it is
      on average 10 times cheaper to reactivate a lapsed customer than it is to
      acquire a new one. Reactivation programs for lapsed customers therefore
      are a low-hanging fruit for marketers looking for new revenue streams.
          Reactivation campaigns are for customers who have not purchased
      anything for an extended period of time. Typically, a customer is con-
      sidered lapsed or lost after she has not spent money with you for twelve
      months. For subscription services, you can consider a customer lapsed
      or lost as soon as they let their subscription expire—whether after one
      month or three years. Lapsed customers can frequently be reactivated
      with the right offer or product recommendation. Since these customers
      have essentially been written off and are not expected to make any addi-
      tional purchases, the most successful reactivation offers are typically fairly
      generous—such as a significant discount on a next purchase.
         Play Nine: Launch Predictive Programs to Retain More Customers         181

     One company we work with noticed it had a large amount of cus-
tomers who once loved the brand but hadn’t engaged with the company
for a while. It wanted to focus on customer loyalty and engagement by
bringing enthusiastic customers back to the brand. The company used
its knowledge of the type of products its customers enjoy to send smart
product recommendations. These campaigns resulted in an eightfold
increase in monthly revenue.
     Reactivating customers builds on the investments you have already
made and avoids the costs of trying to get new customers. These original
customers are already aware of your brand and are more receptive, so
reengaging them can lead to gaining significant incremental revenue.
     In many measurements we made, most reactivated customers behave
like a new customer, that is, they almost restart their life cycle. This also
means that the early periods after reactivation are when customers are
most vulnerable to lapse again and require special attention.


Reactivation Campaigns in Four Steps
So where do you start with reactivation? First, determine which
customers you want to reactivate. Then determine the most receptive
candidates, customize your message to this group, and reengage these
customers using different channels.
     Determine which customers you want to reactivate. Not all past customers
may be worth bringing back. Marketers need to carefully determine
which customers were profitable, interested in products they want to
sell/grow, and other strategic factors. For example, you may want
to exclude customers who returned more than 5 percent or had more
than 30 percent discounting on their previous orders.
     Determine the most receptive candidates. You may only want to approach
past clients who are most likely or ready to respond—especially if your
reactivation campaign is expensive such as in the case of direct mail
or targeted display advertising. Even if you are using email, you
probably don’t want to send marketing messages to customers who
are not ready—otherwise you risk seeming overenthusiastic and drive
customers away.
     Reengage customers using different channels. The shopping journey spans
across many distribution channels. There is no reason your marketing
message should not be omni-channel as well. After customizing a
182              Nine Easy Plays to Get Started with Predictive Marketing

      message using your customer’s past data, try to reach customers at as
      many points as possible. A greater number of contacts usually correlate
      to a higher response rate. So don’t forget to send that email, postcard,
      or app notification with personalized offers.
          Customize marketing message using past data. Now that you know
      which lapsed customers are ready to respond, take a look at their
      purchase history. What have they responded to in the past? What type
      of products do they buy? What kind of brands do they like? Craft your
      messages according to their tastes and needs. By looking at past trends,
      you may be able to figure out why the customer lapsed and use this as
      an opportunity to address this reason. Perhaps the customer may give
      you a second chance.
PART 3


How to Become
a True Predictive
Marketing Ninja




                    183
CHAPTER 14



An Easy-to-Use
Checklist of Predictive
Marketing Capabilities

I n order to use the predictive marketing techniques we discussed in
  this book, you will need to organize your business around the cus-
tomer and acquire both the mind-set and the enabling technologies for
predictive marketing.

Organizational Capabilities for
Predictive Marketing
The mind-set shift required for successful predictive marketing includes
a shift from campaigns to the customer life cycle, products to customers,
siloed to omni-channel approach, and one-size-fits-all approach to con-
textual marketing programs.
     Most marketing organizations are still run based on a calendar of
marketing campaigns: an email blast, an event, a direct mail drop, a dis-
play advertising campaign, a store opening. As a consumer, you don’t
care about marketing campaigns. You are one person and you have one,
continuous, experience—good or bad—with a brand. The marketing
calendar needs to be replaced with the concept of life cycle market-
ing that tries to maximize lifetime value of customers over their entire


                                                                            185
186                 How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja

      engagement with the brand through a series of personalized, triggered
      campaigns.
           Most marketing organizations still operate in silos. You might have
      an email marketing group, a store marketing team, a web manager, a
      direct mail manager, and so on—all working with separate vendors and
      marketing service providers. In many organizations the direct mail group
      doesn’t know what the email group is doing and the email group might
      not talk to the display group. In the meantime, customers are receiving
      mixed messages from different channels.
           We all have received multiple display ads, emails, and catalogs from
      the same vendor that were completely uncoordinated. You might have
      received competing offers from different channels that belong to the
      same organization. The ads may seem irrelevant and the suggestions for
      products had nothing to do with what you have purchased before and
      where you live. To make sure this doesn’t happen, many companies are
      reorganizing their marketing teams around providing customers with
      a consistent message. They are creating omni-channel task teams and
      appointing heads of the omni-channel experience. Many companies also
      use an “integrated campaign planner” for the purpose of cross-functional
      coordination.
           Some companies are starting to organize their marketing team by
      customer life cycle with a separate team focusing on new, existing,
      and lapsed customers, for example. Other companies assign market-
      ing teams by customer personas, such as a publisher which organizes
      around “romance lovers” and “suspense aficionados.” Whatever orga-
      nization structure you choose, focus on the customer and the customer
      experience.
           When Shazam, an online entertainment company, became serious
      about customer engagement, it decided to dedicate a team to this stage
      of the life cycle. Early on, Shazam realized that relevant communica-
      tion keeps customers engaged, a key metric for a consumer marketing
      company. Shazam focused on understanding the engagement behavior
      of each of its users, such as how consumers interacted with its mobile
      application and how their music tastes differed. When Shazam enabled
      highly personalized engagement programs throughout its email mar-
      keting and app experiences, it increased its customer retention by a
      double-digit percentage in the first month of a new registered user,
      which is huge when you calculate the compounding effect on customer
      lifetime value.
           An Easy-to-Use Checklist of Predictive Marketing Capabilities      187

    By now, most people are pretty fed up with “batch and blast”
campaigns where all customers get the same message at the same time.
These sorts of campaigns lead to high opt-out rates and lower the effi-
cacy of marketing campaigns. By contrast, precisely targeted campaigns
can triple prospect conversion and customer engagement. These types
of campaigns take into account the customer’s preferences, interests,
and propensities to buy so marketers can change their messaging based
on the context of each situation.
    When moving from batch and blast to more relevant customer expe-
riences, think about these three dimensions for each program, whether
triggered or scheduled:

1. Audience: The first and most well understood aspect of segmenta-
   tion is deciding who is being targeted and why, what is the context?
   Are you reaching out because the customer has just visited your
   website, or purchased something in a store, or are you trying to
   re-connect with a customer you haven’t heard from in a while.
2. The frequency of the communication: Part of being relevant is also
   knowing the right cadence of communication. The right amount of
   communication with your customer leads to higher engagement and
   ultimately higher retention. By reducing the frequency of emails to
   some customers, we have seen that marketers are able to reduce their
   unsubscribe rates by close to 50 percent.
3. The right content/offer: What is the best content for the customer
   at any point in time—keeping in mind where the customer is in
   their journey with you? In some cases, it could be an offer to entice
   someone to buy something she previously looked at, a reminder to
   come back or an interesting article related to something the customer
   is interested in. For instance, a sporting goods retailer now sends out
   snow reports based on the customer’s location to people whom it
   knows like to buy ski clothes.


Technical Capabilities for Predictive Marketing
Beyond the organization aligned with predictive marketing, you also
need to evaluate your technology stack and make sure you have technical
capabilities to support predictive marketing. In this chapter, we will look
at some of the technical requirements, and in Chapter 15 we will look
at some of the options to satisfy these requirements.
188                       How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja

           The technical capabilities for predictive marketing include the abil-
      ity to (a) aggregate and integrate customer data, (b) analyze and predict
      customer needs, and (c) design and execute customer experiences across
      all customer touch points. We will discuss each of these capabilities in
      greater detail. Figure 14.1 summarizes these capabilities.

                                    Customer Data Integration
      Data integration:                           Data quality:

      ◽ Out-of-the-box connectors for ESPs        ◽ Fuzzy Phonetic matching (partial match)
      ◽ Webtag for capturing key web events       ◽ Standardization (phone, email, address)
      ◽ Standard integration packages (ERP, etc.) ◽ Daily de-duping (individual & household)
      ◽ Turnkey Google analytics integration      ◽ USPS DPV (delivery point verification)/
      ◽ Enterprise grade integration framework      NCOA (national change of address)
                                                  ◽ Genderization
                                                  ◽ Geo tagging
                                       Predictive Intelligence

      Out-of-the-box predictive models:           Built-in reporting:
      ◽ Likelihood-to-buy models                  ◽ Turnkey business and marketing reports
      ◽ Likelihood-to-engage models               ◽ Turnkey, configurable dashboard
      ◽ Clusters (brand, product, behavior)       ◽ Profitability measures (returns, discounts)
      ◽ Predicted customer value                  ◽ Revenue opportunity reports
      ◽ Product recommendations                      (benchmarks)
                                                  ◽ Option to connect data to Tableau, Excel
                                                     or SQL

                                      Campaign Automation
      Campaign execution:                         Campaign design:
      ◽ Native e-mail execution (or via partners) ◽ Segmentation and campaign design UI
      ◽ Native web personalization                ◽ Built-in audiences
      ◽ Social campaigns (Facebook, Twitter,      ◽ Built in e-mail creative templates
        etc.)                                     ◽ A/B testing (measure results based on $)
      ◽ Offline (direct mail, call center, store) ◽ Measurable hold-out group performance
      ◽ Mobile messaging                          ◽ List export (manual and via API)
      ◽ Online advertising (display ad targeting) ◽ Attribution
      ◽ Web retargeting

      Figure 14.1     Checklist of Predictive Marketing Capabilities
           An Easy-to-Use Checklist of Predictive Marketing Capabilities       189

Customer Data Integration
In order to segment and target customers, you will need to collect cus-
tomer data and integrate it into a single customer profile. In Chapter 3,
we described the types of customer data you might want to collect and
explained that data integration is the process of linking all customer data,
including online and offline transactions and engagements, into a single
customer data profile.
     Many marketers start with just online or offline customer data. How-
ever, there are huge benefits to starting out with a view that integrates
both online and offline customer behavior because half of all shoppers
shop both online and offline. There are also many vendors that can help
connect legacy systems like order management and enterprise resource
management systems.
     Connecting and bringing data together is relatively easy these days;
the bigger hurdle is data quality and cleansing. As we discussed in
Chapter 3, if you don’t link your data you may think you have three
unprofitable customers when in reality these purchases add up to one
very high value customer. Data cleansing is an ongoing effort, and
customer data ideally needs to be reconciled on a daily basis. The average
American has three email addresses and moves twelve times in their life,
so chances are you have a lot of duplications in your database.
     One brand we worked with discovered its customer database was
full of duplications, inflating its customer file threefold. Part of the
problem was that the company had never integrated data from offline,
online, and call-center channels. In addition, a long-term promotion
it ran that gave discount to first-time buyers had inflated its customer
file since clever consumers signed up with many different names,
phones, email addresses. Although it was heartbreaking to see the num-
ber of customers decrease, the company now no longer had to waste
a lot of money sending three times the amount of promotions to the
same people.
     Lastly, do not forget to protect any customer data from theft or acci-
dental exposure. Identity theft and credit card breaches are fast-growing
crimes, and unfortunately many companies have made headlines of los-
ing customer data in recent years. You do not want to be one of these
companies. We will address data protection and privacy in Chapter 17.
190                 How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja

      Predictive Insights
      In Chapter 2 we discussed various predictive analytics models in detail,
      including propensity models, clustering models, and recommendations.
      Many technology providers only provide a workbench to create predictive
      models, but some vendors have developed standard models that come out
      of the box. If models come out of the box, ask what other companies
      in your industry have used and tested these models and what were the
      outcomes. Also keep in mind that the predictive analytics process is as
      much about data preparation as it is about the development, testing,
      and deployment of algorithms. Either you have to take care of these
      internally or your service provider or technology provider must do these
      things for you.
           Whereas predictive models allow you to divide your customers into
      distinct segments, analytics reports will allow you to evaluate the efficacy
      of the programs you are running and discover new revenue opportunities
      in your existing customer base.
           Reports can highlight opportunities, such as customers at risk of
      leaving you or a low repeat purchase rate. When a large retailer organized
      its data, it was surprised to find out how few customers came back to
      buy a second time. In fact, repeat buyers made up only 17 percent of
      its customer base. This finding led to discussions at the board level and
      ultimately to a new, companywide, customer relationship management
      strategy to entice first-time buyers to come back.
           The more data you have, the more questions you will have as well.
      Make sure that marketers can access customer data instantly, using an
      easy interface, without the help of IT or professional services resources.
      For example, perhaps you discover you have a very low retention rate
      for high-value customers. You might want to perform some root cause
      analysis to understand this issue. Do these customers buy from different
      channels or buy different products? Is the return rate on those products
      higher than average? These are just some of the questions you might
      want to ask about your business.

      Campaign Automation
      Ultimately, the rubber hits the road when you, the marketer, design the
      experiences that deliver value to customers throughout their life cycle.
      So ask yourself how you are going to design and orchestrate customer
           An Easy-to-Use Checklist of Predictive Marketing Capabilities       191

experiences across channels and across different stages in the customer
life cycle.
     Just having insights is not enough. You need to be able to make
customer insights available at each customer touch point. This means
that customer insights should trigger customer engagement campaigns,
preferably in real time or as real time as possible. Customer insights
should also be used to personalize dynamic content such as emails or
digital advertisements.
     Campaign roadmaps, resource allocation, and project management
shall not be forgotten in the equation for successful execution. Most mar-
keters underestimate the bandwidth required to develop and automate
more targeted campaigns. Make sure to define and assign clearly the dif-
ferent tasks required and phase the project with realistic timelines.


Questions to Ask Predictive Marketing Vendors
The questions you ask about predictive marketing technology will be
driven by your business requirements. To help you get started, we’ve
listed some questions that most companies should ask. The questions fall
into the same three broad categories we have just discussed: Will you
get a complete and accurate picture of your customers? What kinds of
analysis will you get, and how can you use it in day-to-day campaigns?

Will I Get a Complete and Accurate Picture
of My Customers?
What channels are supported? Different execution channels provide
  different types of data and require different types of output. Be sure
  the system can import data from the channels you use today and
  expect to use tomorrow and that it can feed data back to those chan-
  nels in the formats they need. Find out if connectors exist for the
  specific channel systems you have in place and, if not, what’s involved
  in creating them. If you’ll need real-time interactions, such as help-
  ing to personalize web pages for individual visitors, ask specifically
  how this is accomplished. Pay particular attention to the support for
  offline channels such as direct mail, call centers, or in-store purchases.
What types of data are stored within the system? Every system
  starts with customer profiles. Most can also store transactions.
192                 How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja

        Systems designed for campaign management will store promotion
        history and responses. Some will capture different types of unstruc-
        tured data, such as the contents of web pages visited, topics covered
        in news articles, sentiments expressed in public comments, and
        structured information extracted from such sources. Look for the
        ability to store and reconstruct data that may have changed over
        time, such as customer status. Ask whether marketers can add new
        data types and sources for themselves. If you sell to businesses, find
        out whether data is organized at the individual level, company level,
        or both.
      Where does the system get its data? One source is your own sys-
        tems. These include marketing automation and customer relation-
        ship management (CRM) and can extend to web analytics, email
        systems, and order processing systems or repositories. Some vendors
        capture digital behaviors directly through their own tags on web
        pages and emails. Several scan public web sites, social networks, and
        other sources for information that identify companies and individ-
        uals who are likely to be good prospects for their clients. Vendors
        may also load reference data about companies and individuals from
        compiled directories such as Dun & Bradstreet.
      How does the system load its data? Most products offer a combina-
        tion of direct real-time loads via application programming interface
        (API) calls and batch loads of files extracted from other systems.
        Real-time updates are essential if you want treatments in every exe-
        cution system to reflect behaviors in all other channels. Be sure to
        find out if there are any limits to the volume of data that can be
        loaded, either in terms of response time (how many simultaneous
        interactions can the system handle?) or batch volume (will posting
        large files take many hours or incur high costs?).
      Does the system provide data quality and enhancement? It is not
        enough to simply dump customer data into the system. Find out if
        the system can automatically cleanse entries (checking for standard
        formats, fixing misspelled names, and removing profanity), validate
        information (testing for valid email addresses and mailing addresses,
        check that the address is not registered as “do not mail” or that the
        owners have moved, and so on), append likely gender based on first
        name, geo-tag based on address, enhance consumer records with
          An Easy-to-Use Checklist of Predictive Marketing Capabilities    193

  census data or cluster codes, and enhance business records with com-
  pany size, industry, parent company, and so on.
How does the system link data that relates to the same customer?
  Linking related records allows you to remove duplicates and to group
  members of the same consumer household or business. This is essen-
  tial to building a complete profile and to prevent multiple offers to
  the same customer. Linking capabilities vary widely, from sophis-
  ticated “fuzzy matching” of similar name/address strings to simply
  using identifiers provided by your operational systems. Systems may
  also use external reference data, such as directories of companies and
  lists of address changes. Ask how much control you will have over
  matching and householding rules, but bear in mind that most ven-
  dors have more sophisticated approaches than users could create for
  themselves.

What Kinds of Segmentation and Targeting Will I Get?
What kinds of statistical models can the system apply to cus-
  tomer data out of the box? Models may predict responses to a
  specified offer, recommend what information to present, classify cus-
  tomers into segments, or serve other goals. Systems vary in the types
  of models they build, the amount of human effort required to build
  them, whether the system provides its own model-building tools,
  and in reporting provided to explain model results. Ask whether
  the models are rules-based (requiring users to define them manu-
  ally) or statistical (based on truly predictive or automated analysis
  such as clustering, collaborative filtering, and propensity models).
  Rules-based models take much more time to research and configure
  and are often less accurate than statistical methods. Check whether
  the models are standard or custom and what results other businesses
  like yours have seen.
What kinds of analytical reporting and dashboards are avail-
  able? You’ll want basic customer profiling, promotion analysis,
  and segmentation. Some systems offer polished dashboards to
  highlight trends and current activities. Look for data exploration
  features such as drill-downs and filters, custom reports in tables and
  cross-tabulations, data visualization, and trend analysis. Make sure
194                 How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja

          you understand which data is available to the system’s reporting
          tools and whether there are any limits on what can be extracted
          from the system for use by other tools.

      How Easily Can I Take Actions on the Segments
      or Recommendations?
      How does the system help to deliver customer treatments?
        Some predictive marketing platforms execute marketing treatments
        directly, most often by sending emails. But they primarily support
        external execution platforms by delivering data, scores, or decisions.
        They may do this on-demand via APIs, by allowing direct queries
        from external systems, or by sending file extracts. Beyond under-
        standing capabilities, it’s worth knowing which external systems are
        already integrated with a predictive marketing platform and what
        functions those connectors support.

      In Addition to the Questions About Features, Ask Yourself
      Whether This Is the Right Vendor for You
      What’s the underlying technology? Technical information such
        as the type of database gives useful hints about likely strengths,
        weaknesses, and growth potential. You will certainly want to know
        whether the system is offered as a vendor-operated service in the
        cloud, as on-premise installed software, or both. Also ask about
        the scale and nature of existing deployments so you can judge
        whether your business is likely to make demands the vendor has not
        previously met.
      What’s involved in installing and running the system, and how
        long does it take? By definition, predictive marketing platforms are
        designed for nontechnical users. But it is still important to under-
        stand how the system is set up, how long the initial deployment is
        likely to take, what is expected of the client and what the vendor
        will do for you, and what kinds of training and support are available.
        Judge the skill level and time commitment you will need to oper-
        ate the system on a day-to-day basis and to make occasional changes
        such as adding a new data source.
          An Easy-to-Use Checklist of Predictive Marketing Capabilities      195

What help is provided to analyze data, segment customers, or
   run campaigns? The services and resources included in the sub-
   scription or license fees vary greatly. Find out which services are
   available for free and which involve additional charges. Does the ven-
   dor provide predefined campaigns or a playbook of recommended
   actions? Are there ongoing training and tune-up sessions? How many
   hours or many sessions with a customer success representative are
   included? Is the customer service staff trained as engineers or mar-
   keters? How much experience do they have running campaigns like
   the ones you are planning?
What will the system cost? Prices may be based on data volume, trans-
   actions, the number of customers monitored, user count, or other
   dimensions. There may also be separate implementation, training,
   and support fees. Get a detailed quote and be sure it is all-inclusive.
   Look at whether you will need to sign a long-term contract, whether
   pricing is related to performance, and what happens if service level
   guarantees are not met.
Who am I doing business with? The background of a system’s devel-
   oper often gives hints about its suitability for particular purposes,
   degree of sophistication, scalability, growth path, and likelihood of
   long-term survival. Information about funding, number of clients,
   and time on the market also addresses these topics.
Are you a consumer marketer or a business marketer? Most solu-
   tions are heavily specialized in either consumer marketing or business
   marketing, which will influence built-in templates, connectors, and
   even predictive models.
What is your business goal? Some solutions that claim to deliver pre-
   dictive marketing are focused on helping you find new prospects or
   audiences for your products, whereas others focus more on optimiz-
   ing lifetime value of your existing customers. Whatever your business
   goals are, make sure the solution you are considering supports them.
Do I have requirements for on-premise software or can I deploy
   a cloud solution? In some companies, security policies or other
   requirements dictate that only on-premise software can be deployed.
   On the other end of the spectrum, more and more companies find
   that choosing cloud-based solutions gives them more flexibility, faster
   time to deployment, and lower total cost of ownership.
196                 How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja

      Do you go with a turnkey or a customized solution? Some
         solutions are highly customizable and customized for each and
         every customer, whereas other solutions come with many default,
         out-of-the-box models, audiences, and campaigns.
      Do you have true omni-channel requirements? Before you go too
         far, decide which channels are your priorities: advertising, social,
         mobile, web, email, direct mail, call centers, or in-store clienteling.
         All solutions will have strengths and weaknesses.
CHAPTER 15



An Overview of
Predictive (and Related)
Marketing Technology

Y   ou have three options if you want to build the technical capabilities
    outlined in Chapter 14: (1) build predictive models yourself using a
predictive analytics workbench and somehow import these models into
your campaign management tools, (2) outsource predictive analytics-
powered campaigns to a marketing service provider, or (3) evaluate and
buy a predictive marketing solution, such as a predictive marketing cloud
or a multichannel campaign management tool. We will look at the pros
and cons of each of these three options and also discuss related technolo-
gies, which may claim some predictive analytics capabilities.


Do-It-Yourself Predictive Marketing
Predictive marketing technologies have existed for many years in the
form of modeling tools such as SAS, SPSS, and Matlab. Many large com-
panies, ranging from Netflix, Amazon, or Best Buy, to many companies
in travel and telecommunications have teams of data scientists who use
these workbench-type products to develop predictive algorithms.
     However, utilizing these tools has several important drawbacks:
before you can use a predictive analytics workbench tool, you first need

                                                                             197
198                 How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja

      to translate your business requirements into technical requirements
      that data scientists could turn into algorithms. Most marketers are ill
      equipped to do this, and may not be able to accomplish this task without
      the help of external consultants. In some ways, you have to reinvent the
      wheel. From scratch, you have to define what type of models you need
      for which business problems, and—unless you are using an experienced
      data scientist—you don’t get to benefit from the lessons learned by
      other companies in your industry.
           Utilizing the workbench-type products requires a team of data scien-
      tists to collect and integrate data, prepare data, develop, test, and deploy
      models, and ongoing involvement from IT and data scientists to help
      marketers run reports, extract segments, and prepare lists for campaigns.
      Many companies have trouble automating predictive marketing using
      these modeling tools.
           Most analytical efforts would yield great result if it could be made
      part of the workflow of a company. When Omer worked at McKinsey,
      he helped to create some powerful analysis and algorithms, but as soon as
      McKinsey walked out of the room, there was no way for the customer to
      repeat the analysis or provide the predictive scoring on an ongoing basis.
      One of the projects Omer was involved in was at Micro Warehouse, a
      company for which he later headed up marketing. He created powerful
      models for optimizing marketing spend and another model for estimat-
      ing the upside potential of business customers. These models yielded
      extremely good results when tested during the project, but when the
      project was over, the company could not institutionalize these predic-
      tive marketing tools. This was one of the reasons the late Jerry York,
      who was the CEO of Micro Warehouse, recruited Omer to head up
      analytical marketing.


      Outsourcing to Marketing Service Providers
      Database marketing service providers (MSPs) provide a fully outsourced
      option for companies to outsource and analyze their customer database.
      Most MSPs evolved from providing data hygiene and processing for
      direct mail campaigns to offer full hosting and managing of customer
      databases as well as layering on additional services such as analytics and
      consulting. For the most part, MSPs focus on servicing larger companies.
          Most MSPs will have predictive analytics capabilities, but these
      capabilities tend to be manifested in highly customized models that are
          An Overview of Predictive (and Related) Marketing Technology         199

built or tweaked on a per-customer basis by professional services teams.
Therefore MSPs are a good option if you have the time and money for
a longer-term engagement.
     By using an MSP you can reduce your reliance on internal IT. There
are, however, inherent disadvantages about outsourcing your customer
database. You often have to pay per list or per campaign, and MSPs are
not set up to provide customer insights that extend beyond a specific
campaign. Omer has experienced firsthand that every report you want
to run needs to be paid for and scheduled in advance, which often means
waiting weeks or months for the answer to a question. If you keep cus-
tomer analytics at arms’ length in this way, it is unlikely that you will
build a truly customer-centric organization. For those who are commit-
ted to build their company and strategy around the customer, our strong
belief is that it is imperative to bring customer data in-house and to give
all customer-facing personnel instant access to customer data.
     Most marketing service providers are essentially consulting organi-
zations. Most have the capabilities to deliver direct mail and email cam-
paigns, but lack the product capabilities to deliver real-time, personalized
experiences, such as real-time web recommendations or personalized
advertising campaigns.

Campaign Management and Marketing
Cloud Options
Campaign management products are focused on designing and executing
marketing campaigns across channels, including email campaigns, web
campaigns, social campaigns, and mobile messaging. Almost none of the
campaign management tools execute all of these channels natively but
will rely on third parties for some. Campaign management tools certainly
can help you plan the right message to the right customer at the right
time, via the right channel. Many of these tools started as email service
providers and therefore have a strong focus around the email channel,
rather than the customer. Customer profile capabilities are still very rudi-
mentary in many of these systems, though all are certainly focused to
improve these.
    Most campaign management tools have a strong online focus, and
quite a few have not yet built out the data hygiene capabilities to
track and correct physical address information. Also, not all campaign
management tools have robust data management capabilities such as
200                  How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja

      online/offline identity resolution, fuzzy matching, deduping capabili-
      ties. Therefore, most campaign management tools cannot be used as a
      single source of marketing execution needs.
           Most campaign management solutions are evolving to refer to them-
      selves as marketing clouds, sometimes including some data management
      platform or content management and collaboration capabilities as well.
      Please note that at the time of this writing, the vendor landscape is in
      high flux. Many established software vendors are offerings a compila-
      tion of multiple products under one brand umbrella, not well integrated.
      There are many startups early- and late-stage funded by venture capi-
      tal firms that are working to build solutions from ground up with the
      customer data being the key element for the connected omni-channel
      customer and marketer of today.
           Business marketing–oriented campaign management tools are often
      referred to as marketing automation tools. Marketing automation ven-
      dors, too, typically started as email execution for business marketing but
      quickly added the ability to design web forms and track user engage-
      ment across web and email. Some marketing automation vendors can
      now also design and track social campaigns as well. Marketing automa-
      tion tools can link customer data from different sources, but tend to
      lack robust data management capabilities and require matching to busi-
      ness information from various standardized data sources. Most marketing
      automation vendors have some built-in lead scoring, based on rules,
      but many are not using truly predictive models yet. In business mar-
      keting, predictive technologies tend to create less value, as the size of the
      customer base is smaller. Like campaign management platforms, market-
      ing automation tools were developed from a perspective of campaigns,
      and the architecture therefore tends to be campaign-focused, rather than
      customer-focused.

      Other Tools You May Have Heard About
      There are several other marketing tools you may be operating or that
      you may have heard about that tout predictive or analytics capabilities.
      Most of these other technologies are not sufficient for predictive market-
      ing, but can still play an important role in marketers’ toolkits. For the sake
      of completion, we summarize these related technologies in Figure 15.1,
      which you can use as a reference to lookup “what’s what.”
      Type                  Description              Value                    Customer data           Predictive insights       Campaign automation
      Marketing ServiceFull outsourced               Optimization of direct Customer database is      Advanced segmentation Direct mail and email
        Provider (MSP)    marketing analytics          mail and email          outsourced, not           controlled by the       campaigns; no
                          and database                 campaigns               accessible to the         outside service         real-time web or
                          management                                           marketer                  provider                advertising
      Campaign Manage- Design, orchestrate and     Demand generation        Ability to collect, but   Limited predictive      Direct or partner based
        ment/Marketing     execute omni-               and loyalty             limited ability to        models; often custom    ability to execute
        Automation         channel marketing           marketing;              deduplicate or            models requiring        across channels; online
                           campaigns                   primarily for online    cleanse; exact match      services                and offline channels
                                                       channels                only
      Web Analytics      Measure both aggregate Website and mobile          Website metrics, can be   Conversion trends,        Personalized messages on
                            and user level data        performance             tied to a person by      website usability and      the website, via email
                            on owned website           optimization            matching user ID’s       individual user flows      or SMS to specific
                            properties                                         with your database                                  segments
      Data Management Cookie- and first-party Understand makeup of Combining first-party              Some predictive           Display advertising
        Platform (DMP)      data for top of funnel     website audiences;      cookie data with          modeling, specifically    centric, some ability
                            campaigns such as          use for                 third-party data to       likelihood to convert     to personalize online
                            retargeting and            personalization and     segment and analyze       of online audiences       experiences specially
                            lookalike targeting        targeting of web        online audiences                                    web and email
                                                       and advertising
      Email Service      Design and send email     Email automation and Just email behavior,          Some analytics and         Email only; but most
        Provider (ESP)      campaigns                  email deliverability    some data cleansing       reporting, but usually    ESPs are evolving into
                                                                               but no fuzzy              limited or no             full campaign
                                                                               matching                  predictive capabilities   automation solutions
      Customer           Manage contacts,          Funnel management,       Ability to collect, but   A snapshot of the current Direct sales, call center
        Relationship        accounts and               sales management        not to de-duplicate       funnel, limited           campaigns, can power
        Management          opportunities                                      or cleanse customer       historical views and      external campaign
        (CRM)                                                                  data                      no predictive views       management
      Advanced analytics Provide data analysis and Information, visibility Any data can be            Predictive analytics       None, this is an analysis
                            reporting                                          collected and             workbench, build          tool
                                                                               mapped                    your own
                                                                                                         models—no turnkey
                                                                                                         models

      Figure 15.1     Predictive Marketing Technologies Overview




201
202                 How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja

      Web Analytics
      Web analytics is a critical component to any marketer’s toolkit. There are
      two fundamentally different types of web analytics: the first provides
      reports or analysis of web browsing data on an aggregated basis, while
      the second type performs person-by-person analysis of named (or anony-
      mous) visitors. Enterprise class web analytics tools provide both aggre-
      gate and user-level analytics, ad hoc discovery, and data mining now.
      Web analytics is mostly aimed to help you improve your user interface
      and site performance. These tools do not aim to deliver omni-channel
      customer experiences. Some advanced web analytics tools are starting to
      introduce segment discovery and propensity models, but generally these
      are highly custom deployments. Web analytics tools do not aim to build
      customer 360 profiles by linking customer data from sources other than
      your website, nor execute campaigns across channels.

      Data Management Platforms (DMPs)
      A data management platform will collect first-party data from a com-
      pany’s owned web properties, layer this data together with third-party,
      cookie-based data, and provide analysis about the audience segments of
      the website visitors. This analysis can be used to target specific audiences
      with display, search, video, and social advertising campaigns. DMPs deal
      mostly with anonymous, cookie-based information, and the goal is to
      acquire more new customers through advertising campaigns, rather than
      to optimize the lifetime value of existing customers. DMP platforms
      are definitely developing into central data hubs, integrating data from
      different sources. For the time being, data management platforms and
      predictive marketing platforms therefore are very complementary, but
      over time it is likely that these two data platforms will converge, as is
      outlined in Figure 15.2.

      Email Service Providers (ESPs)
      Email service providers help you design, schedule, and deliver your email
      campaigns. Some email service providers also allow you to integrate
      third-party data sources and use those to segment your email database and
      to trigger campaigns. For the most part, data integration is cumbersome,
      doesn’t come out of the box, and requires extensive professional services.
          An Overview of Predictive (and Related) Marketing Technology     203




Figure 15.2   Convergence of DMP and Predictive Marketing

Most email service providers are evolving to become fully functional
campaign management systems, covering more than just email. Several
email service providers were recently acquired by larger marketing cloud
vendors, and few stand-alone email service providers remain.

Customer Relationship Management (CRM)
Customer relationship management systems were envisioned and
designed as sales performance management or funnel management
systems. Despite its name, most systems do not yet manage the cus-
tomer relationship. Rather, these systems provide a central repository
204                  How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja

      of customer data, but most don’t include predictive analytics capabil-
      ities. CRM systems do not aim to provide omni-channel campaign
      automation but can integrate with systems that do. Similar to email and
      marketing automation, CRM systems can integrate bidirectionally with
      predictive marketing clouds. For example, if you use a CRM system
      in your call center, then call center interaction data can be imported
      into your predictive marketing cloud, linked to a customer’s profile, and
      included in predictive analyses.


      Advanced Analytics
      Business intelligence (BI) solutions provide analytics, though typically
      this is limited to backward-looking or descriptive analytics. The goal for
      most BI tools is to give an overview of your business trends overall, not to
      analyze individual customers. You might be able to see the average order
      value of your customer base and the sales by region, but not what is the
      lifetime value of a single customer or whether this customer buys from
      you in different stores or just one. You can certainly learn a lot about your
      customers and your business using business intelligence. Most business
      intelligence tools are general purpose, but some vendors are emerging to
      focus specifically on marketers with built-in reports and dashboards for
      this audience. BI tools can integrate, and often clean, data from different
      data sources. BI tools, however, do not include predictive analyses and
      do not aim to provide omni-channel campaign automation.


      Which Solution Is Right for Me?
      Keep your end goal in mind: make your customers happy by deliver-
      ing valuable, relevant, and meaningful customer experiences in every
      context. This will build the kind of engagement that leads to profitable
      relationships with customers. So ask yourself, what capabilities will help
      me deliver the most valuable experiences and build the most profitable
      relationships, in the shortest period of time?
           The more relevant the predictive models, the more relevant the cus-
      tomer’s experience because you will have more ways to anticipate and
      serve your customer’s needs. The more accurate and complete the cus-
      tomer profiles, the more relevant the experiences. If you can link all past
          An Overview of Predictive (and Related) Marketing Technology       205

customer actions to a single profile, you can better anticipate and serve
customer needs. The easier and more accessible the technology is to all
marketers, the more likely it will be used in everyday campaigns.
    If you are like most marketers, you don’t have an infinite budget, so
you would like this solution to be up and running as soon as possible
and require as little as possible in terms of data integration and ongoing
professional services. So in an ideal world, you would have access to a
turnkey, out-of-the-box solution, with truly predictive capabilities and
advanced data quality that gives you, the marketer, control over your
own customer data.
    Whatever path you choose, make sure to build these three funda-
mental capabilities discussed throughout this book:

1. The ability to link customer data from different sources, online and
   offline, as well as to prepare your data for predictive analysis.
2. The ability to analyze customer data, using turnkey or custom pre-
   dictive models, to perform advanced analysis and segmentation.
3. The ability to trigger the right action for the right customer at the
   right time, across your different marketing execution systems.

    Then place this system at the center of any marketing
infrastructure—forming the central nervous system, operating system,
or brain of your customer operations. Make sure the system updates
automatically, at least once a day, ideally without manual intervention,
to ensure the latest customer data is there.


Whatever You Do—Get Started
If there is only one thing you take away from this book, let it be that
you should get started as soon as possible and focus on the very basics
and do them well. Choosing the wrong vendor or the wrong campaign
is not as bad as waiting. Your competitors are already leveraging pre-
dictive marketing today and gaining a significant competitive advantage
from their early experiments. Remember that many companies are see-
ing the lifetime value, retention, and loyalty of their customers increase
dramatically using predictive marketing techniques.
     Here are three recommendations.
206                 How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja

      Get Started Small
      With a couple of thousand dollars a month and a couple of weeks of inte-
      gration work, you can begin solving your customer data problem and run
      your first marketing campaign. The best way to build a case for predic-
      tive marketing is to just get started. Given the large returns expected for
      this investment, you really cannot afford to wait. Ask yourself how you
      would feel if your competitors deployed this type of technology first.
      How would your customers feel if they are getting personalized treat-
      ment from your competitors first, but not from you? Also ask yourself
      if there are other projects on your plate that can truly give you a higher
      return on investment.

      Bring Customer Data in House but Outsource
      the Data Science
      We strongly believe that it is not possible to become truly customer-
      centric without making customer data available to all customer-facing
      personnel in your organization, starting with you—the marketers.
      Therefore, we strongly recommend against outsourcing your customer
      database to a third-party provider such as a marketing service provider.
      It will be too difficult to access data when and how you want it and
      the customer insights will reside outside your organization. Bringing
      customer data in-house does not mean that you need to hire expensive
      data scientists or technology resources. Easy-to-use, online solutions are
      available that allow you to own and access your customer data at any
      time, but use outside vendors to create the advanced statistical models.
      Data scientists are in high demand, and most marketers do not have
      the bandwidth and expertise to hire, provide direction, and retain such
      analytical personnel. The best data scientists that truly make an impact
      are the ones that have business acumen, which are even harder to find.
      Data science is a good way to gain insights, but it is hard to make the
      information available at every customer touch-point without extensive
      IT projects. Therefore, start with the end in mind and find the most
      practical solution that gets you to making a difference in the way your
      customers interact with your brand.
          An Overview of Predictive (and Related) Marketing Technology      207

Complement Your Existing Infrastructure
with Predictive Marketing
You don’t have to rip and replace your existing infrastructure. You can
certainly get started by complementing your existing infrastructure with
robust data cleansing and predictive capabilities. Start small and expand
your deployment over time. This could include embedding predictive
capabilities into your different marketing channels, such as email, and
perhaps replacing your existing specialized tools with a single campaign
management platform to coordinate campaigns across all channels.
According to a recent AgilOne survey of 132 retail marketing execu-
tives, only 17 percent of marketers use a single solution to coordinate
omni-channel campaigns. However, of the remaining 83 percent who
do not yet centrally coordinate campaigns, 42 percent plan to develop
such centralized capabilities in the next 12 months.
CHAPTER 16



Career Advice for
Aspiring Predictive
Marketers

I f you are fearful of data and machine learning, you are not alone.
  You may have a job in marketing because you love creating amaz-
ing experiences for customers and consider yourself a creative person.
Perhaps you were never good at math, and all this talk about data and
machine learning makes you feel uncomfortable. You would be surprised
how little knowledge you need about predictive analytics to make you
an expert! The definition of an expert is somebody who knows more
about a subject than 95 percent of the population. Just reading this book
will probably place you in that top 5 percent. Plus, while predictive mar-
keting uses predictive analytics under the hood, you don’t need to know
predictive analytics at all to be a predictive marketing expert.
    There is a huge career opportunity that comes from being an early
adopter of new technologies, like predictive analytics, and new business
practices, like predictive marketing. There are very few marketers out
there who have direct experience using predictive analytics, or practicing
predictive marketing. This means that even a little bit of experience can
greatly differentiate you in the job market and place you ahead of more
tenured marketers. Plus, the demand for data-driven marketers will only
continue to increase.
    Here are some career tips for aspiring predictive marketers.
                                                                             209
210                 How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja

      Business Understanding Trumps Math
      Hundreds of programs around the world are popping up at universi-
      ties with degrees in data science or data analysis. Don’t sign up just
      yet! We believe it is a real misunderstanding that in order to be data-
      driven and practice predictive marketing you need to be able to crunch
      numbers.
           Numbers and stats are useless without people who can draw mean-
      ing from the data and turn it into strategies, products, and campaigns.
      This process requires a unique combination of the creative, analytical,
      and interpersonal skills so often siloed into different departments and
      job roles. As big data rises, the need increases for big data marketers who
      can draw insight and inspiration from the stats and target consumers
      accordingly.
           It turns out that finding people who know the business, target market
      and customer needs well enough to interpret data is much harder than
      finding data scientists to crunch the numbers. Plus, new technologies are
      becoming available that hide the complicated math under the hood and
      present data in a way that is easy for marketers to understand and use.
           Although you don’t need to learn to crunch numbers, you still need
      to feel comfortable using and interpreting them. That means you need
      to overcome any fear of numbers as quickly as possible. Start by using
      and learning simple analytics tools such as Google Analytics or even by
      understanding and reading financial statements of companies you know
      from your everyday life. Popular books like Freakonomics, NurtureShock,
      or Moneyball might also help you hone your data-driven way of think-
      ing by applying an analytics approach to economics, education, and
      baseball, respectively.


      Ask the Right Questions
      So if predictive marketing is about interpreting and using data, how
      might a marketer get started with that? The most important thing is
      to demonstrate curiosity and ask the right questions about your business
      and customers. Start with a hypothesis. For example, you might hypoth-
      esize that you are losing customers because a new competitor is stealing
      market share or because customers are dissatisfied with your latest prod-
      uct lineup. Once you have a hypothesis it is much easier to go look for
                  Career Advice for Aspiring Predictive Marketers                 211

the data to support or deny this thesis. Any analytical approach is a tool
to solve a problem and not a solution on its own. This is very impor-
tant to internalize. Many failed projects around analytics are due to this
search for the magic bullet that never yields results.
     Specifically, ask creative, deep questions about your customers.
Increasingly, it is the marketing organization that owns customer data
and customer insights. A recent survey of 132 marketing executives
found that the marketing department is responsible for customer data in
75 percent of companies. Management is starting to look to marketing
to inform major strategic decisions for the company. This type of
visibility in the company can be great for your career.
     Recently, the director of customer relationship management at a
large discount retailer discovered that a larger than average percentage
of customers bought from it once but never came back. In other words,
a large number of their customers were “one and done,” which is a com-
mon problem in retail. Increasing repeat buyers became a huge growth
opportunity for the company. The board of directors of this publicly
traded company discussed these reports. Ultimately the director received
a promotion and was asked to lead a worldwide team tasked to increase
customer engagement and customer lifetime value.
     Do not just look at the data—mix it with real-life customer expe-
riences. Often the best questions come from real interactions with cus-
tomers. Do not just stay in your cubicle; get out in the field and interact
with real customers. There is no substitute for customer face time.
     Dominique once worked in Japan for Nippon Telegraph and
Telephone (NTT) when it had half a million employees. Every
employee in the company was asked to spend a couple of weekends
working in the company store to make sure each employee was tuned
in to the customer needs. Similarly, Disney asks all new employees—
including executives—to work in theme parks in character costume to
understand the customer experience up close. If your company doesn’t
have an initiative like this, you might start one. It will surely differentiate
you and make you, and your colleagues, better marketers.


Blend the Art and Science of Marketing
In an episode of the television series The Crazy Ones with Robin
Williams, a New York advertising agency hires a data analyst against the
212                 How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja

      wishes of Williams’s character, Simon. The company has a new client
      that sells cat food, and the data-driven marketing campaign designed
      by the young data analyst outperforms the marketing idea of veteran
      Simon. Initially Simon and the data analyst clash, but eventually they
      come to a happy place of blending the art and science of marketing.
      In this case, prime time television is not far off the mark. Successful
      marketers learn to combine the science of numbers with the art of
      creativity. Remember: Your job is to differentiate, delight, and disrupt.
            Probably the most important thing to realize is that data science
      will not replace the need for creative thinkers. Dan Pingree, CMO at
      Moosejaw, described data-driven marketing as a way to inspire and val-
      idate the creative process. Using data, you can discover new customer
      personas and marketing strategies and test that your creative ideas are
      working.
            Netflix and its chief content officer, Ted Sarandos, have been outspo-
      ken proponents of data-driven programming, which they say was behind
      the company’s biggest successes in in-house programming, such as House
      of Cards and Orange Is the New Black. However, at a Sundance panel called
      “How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Trust the Algorithm,” Sarandos
      conceded: “It is important to know which data to ignore. In practice,
      it’s probably a 70–30 mix. Seventy is the data, and 30 is judgment—But
      the 30 needs to be on top.”


      Learn from Others
      There is still a lot you can learn from traditional marketers. Traditional
      database marketers, who were focused on direct mail campaigns, are
      the most experienced marketers when it comes to predictive analytics.
      Because it is expensive to send a postcard or catalog, database mar-
      keters have long used likelihood to buy models and clusters to focus
      their mailers on the highest response segments. Digital marketers and
      database marketers don’t typically spend much time together, but they
      should! The principles used for many years in database marketing directly
      apply to modern data-driven marketing. If you have a current or former
      database marketer on your team, take them out for lunch and learn about
      advanced segmentation from them. If you don’t have a database marketer
      on your team, perhaps find somebody in your LinkedIn network and
      make contact.
                 Career Advice for Aspiring Predictive Marketers             213

     You are not alone in your desire to learn about data-driven marketing
and predictive marketing. There is no need for you to reinvent the wheel.
You could look up companies in your industry that you admire and
contact peers through LinkedIn. Most will be just as keen as you are to
get together to compare notes. Start a formal or informal meet-up group
with other people interested in the field and get together on a regular
basis to compare notes. You could bring in outside speakers to educate
you and your friends. You can even go a step further and make this a
larger gathering in the form of a formal meet-up. Leading a meet-up
can be a great way to increase your visibility in the industry and to add
relevant leadership experience to your resume.
     A great source of learning is also technology vendors selling
predictive marketing software. These vendors are working with many
companies in your industry and can educate you on best practices and
benchmarks which otherwise might be hard to get a hold of. Software
sales have changed a lot in recent years. Most vendors invest heavily in
educational content, training, conferences, and even industry dinners
and give you access to all these free resources long before they will ever
try to sell you something. You should definitely take advantage of this
opportunity and do not feel shy to reach out to relevant technology
companies—our company AgilOne included. We would love to talk to
you and help you further your career!
CHAPTER 17



Privacy and the
Difference Between
Delightful and Invasive

T   his is the time to focus on the customer, and build a valuable brand
    and personal competitive advantage in the process. However, never
forget that you are dealing with customer data, and inevitably there will
be privacy concerns that arise. Marketers today are struggling to walk the
line between privacy and personalization, not realizing that these goals
do not have to be mutually exclusive.
    In general, consumers are willing to share preference information
in exchange for apparent benefits, such as convenience, from using per-
sonalized products and services. A research paper titled “Personalization
versus Privacy: An Empirical Examination of the Online Consumer’s
Dilemma” by the Marshall School of Business found evidence that
online consumers’ intention to use personalization services (and hence
their willingness to share information) is positively correlated with
factors that build trust in the vendor offering personalization services.
These findings would argue that online vendors that seek to benefit
from their personalization strategies should not only be mindful of their
consumers’ privacy concerns but should also uncover ways through
which they can build trust. In fact, the relative reputation of online
vendors is one reason why consumers prefer to use personalization

                                                                             215
216                  How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja

      from one vendor while ignoring another, even if the services are
      virtually undifferentiated. Two important factors known to build trust
      are the consumer’s familiarity with the vendor and her past experiences
      with them.
          Here are some more guidelines for dealing with customer data and
      engendering trust. First, inform online consumers about what informa-
      tion will be collected how and why. Second, give online consumers a
      choice about how their information will be used and to which parties
      it will be disclosed. Third, make sure you have adequate mechanisms to
      protect online consumer information from theft, accidental loss or unau-
      thorized use. You don’t want to end up on the front page of the Wall
      Street Journal after a breach. Adequate protection also requires that there
      is an effective authority to enforce and impose sanctions for potential
      violations.


      Types of Personal Information
      When it comes to personalization, there are different types of customer
      information that can be used, and consumers may feel different about
      one type of information over the other.
           Anonymous information. It refers to information gathered about page
      visits without the use of any invasive technologies, typically the standard
      information sent with any web or Internet request. Such information
      includes a machine’s IP address, domain type, browser version and type,
      operating system, browser language, and local time.
           Personally unidentifiable information. It refers to “information that,
      taken alone, cannot be used to identify or locate an individual.” Informa-
      tion such as age, date of birth, gender, occupation, education, income,
      zip code with no address, interest, and hobbies fall into this category.
      The consumer through radio buttons, menus, or check boxes on a web
      page has to explicitly disclose most of this information. In addition to
      solicited information, personally unidentifiable information also often
      involves the use of sophisticated tracking technologies, for example,
      cookies, clear gifs, and so on. Such technologies, though not identifying
      a customer individually, enable the information collecting entity to
      sketch an effective customer profile.
           Personally identifiable information. It refers to information that can be
      used to identify or locate an individual. These include email addresses,
            Privacy and the Difference Between Delightful and Invasive         217

name, address, phone number, fax number, credit card number, social
security number, and so on. Invariably, such information is almost always
gathered explicitly from the customer and is typically collected when
consumers register with websites or engage in financial transactions.
     There is some evidence that there is an important psychological dif-
ference between companies you have chosen to do business with using
your personally identifiable data and companies that you have not pre-
viously bought from using any data, even if it is anonymous. If you have
eaten in a restaurant before, you appreciate it if you get recognized when
you return: if the waiter knows your name and remembers that you like
your meat medium-rare you will be impressed. However, if a stranger
on the street suddenly addresses you by name and asks if you enjoyed the
whiskey you drank last night—that is invasive. The same is true on the
Internet. If you have bought from Gucci before, you might appreciate it
if they recognize you as a high-value shopper and send you a Christmas
gift. However, if Gucci competitor Versace is relentlessly targeting you
with display ads that follow you around the web, you might find that
annoying and creepy.
     Get Elastic found that 57 percent of online shoppers are comfort-
able sharing information as long as it is for their benefit—and being
unknowingly followed across the Internet by unknown brands is hardly
a benefit. At the same time Consumer Reports found that 71 percent
of consumers state that they are very concerned about online compa-
nies selling or sharing information about them without their permission,
causing more and more marketers to make the transition from traditional
third-party cookie retargeting to first-party data.


Avoid Invasive Situations
Use common sense when considering whether a marketing campaign is
delightful or creepy. Consider the context of the situation. Some actions
that are delightful in some situations might be downright creepy if you
change the context. For example, if a sales representative greets me in
the store it is fine, but if the same sales representative comes to my house
at 10 pm in the evening, it is downright creepy. It seems that customers
are more comfortable still with asynchronous communications, such as
email, than with real-time personalization such as display advertising.
We shared in Chapter 11 that 66 percent of U.S. consumers appreciate
218                 How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja

      an email offer related to something they looked at online previously, but
      only 24 percent appreciate to receive this same offer in the form of an
      online advertisement.
          Customer perceptions differ greatly from customer to customer and
      from segment to segment. In general, data from the Columino survey
      of 3,000 consumers shows that consumers in the United States were
      much more likely to expect online retailers to personalize experiences
      than those in the United Kingdom: about half of Americans want to
      receive a new customer welcome greeting, versus only 34 percent in the
      United Kingdom. Also, shoppers, aged 18 to 34, part of the “millennial”
      generation, were more likely to appreciate almost all forms personaliza-
      tion: 52 percent of millennials expect brands to remember their birthday
      as compared to 21 percent of shoppers aged 65 and over. Because of
      these differences, it is very important not to generalize: some customers
      will outright demand personalization, whereas others are categorically
      turned off by it. What is important is to develop customer profiles for
      each and every customer, and to track in these profiles what type of
      personalization a customer appreciates.

      Give Customers Control
      Consumers will want control over their own data, and companies that
      give control over their data will win. Large companies like Google and
      Amazon are already doing this. Giving customers visibility into some of
      the inputs into the algorithm also makes the whole process of predictive
      analytics much less scary. There are three effective ways of giving con-
      sumers more visibility and control over the ways you are using their data:

      1. Edit data: Provide customers with the ability to determine which data
         a company can use for recommendations, so the user can erase specific
         history (such as a purchase they made for a friend’s baby shower) or
         completely turn off certain data sources.
      2. Explain why: Explain why a specific recommendation is made, so the
         user can understand where the relevance comes from. This simple
         approach usually makes even the mistake seem logical and under-
         standable to the user.
      3. Feedback loop: Provide user the ability to give feedback, whether the
         recommendation was good or bad. This is also called reinforcement
         learning that learns not only by observing user behavior (implicit
         learning), but by receiving input (explicit learning).
             Privacy and the Difference Between Delightful and Invasive          219

Hard Boundaries and Government Legislation
Beyond sound business practice, there are also hard boundaries of pri-
vacy. For example, in some cases you cannot collect and sell information
without the customer’s permission. There are different industry rules and
legislations designed to prevent accidental information disclosure or loss.
In the European Union, data privacy is governed by the Data Protec-
tion Directive. American companies wanting to do business in Europe
are required to follow the US-EU Safe Harbor Privacy Principles. Any
companies processing credit card information must comply with The
Payment Credit Card Industry’s Data Security Standard.
     The US-EU Safe Harbor Privacy Principles allow for a streamlined pro-
cess for U.S. companies to comply with the EU Directive 95/46/EC on
the protection of personal data. The Safe Harbor Principles are designed
to prevent accidental information disclosure or loss. Companies oper-
ating in the European Union are not allowed to send personal data to
countries outside the European Economic Area unless there is a guar-
antee that it will receive adequate levels of protection. There are also
requirements for ensuring that appropriate employee training and an
effective dispute mechanism are in place.
     The Payment Credit Card Industry’s Data Security Standard, called PCI
DSS, was developed by the credit card industry. All merchants that handle
credit card information are required to comply with this standard, but in
security circles the standard is also widely regarded as a good common-
sense benchmark for data protection. Even if you are not subject to PCI
DSS, you may look to this framework to get an idea how to best pro-
tect customer data. Some of the capabilities that are required with PCI
DSS are the requirement to install and maintain a firewall, to encrypt
transmission of cardholder data, and to track and monitor all access to
network resources and cardholder data. In total, the standard specifies
12 requirements for compliance.
     In some countries, like the United Kingdom, Spain, and Portugal,
consent of the individual is required to collect and process informa-
tion, and in the case of sensitive personal information, explicit consent
is required. The laws in the United States are somewhat of a patchwork
across states, but generally speaking the United States has the least restric-
tions on data privacy. Consult with a legal expert, especially when doing
business in different countries, because local laws and regulations change
frequently, and many regions, including the United States and Europe,
are considering more stringent data protection laws.
220                 How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja

           We hope that companies will do what is right so that the government
      will not step in with legislation that is too invasive. One thing is clear:
      to bolster consumer trust and confidence, companies should protect and
      treat customers’ data like it is their own. Businesses must think of data
      privacy not as a back-office activity for compliance, but as a competitive
      differentiator that improves the customer-experience.
CHAPTER 18



The Future of Predictive
Marketing

U    pon entering a Rebecca Minkoff store in New York or San
     Francisco, the very first thing a customer encounters is a wall-
length touch screen that offers free drinks. Guests have the opportunity
to order a free water, tea, coffee, or espresso. They’re asked for a phone
number where they will receive a text as soon as their drink is ready.
     That perk is not just out of the goodness of Minkoff’s heart.
That phone number serves as a digital signature, which tracks them
throughout the store. That large touch screen also lets them browse the
brand’s catalog and put together outfits. While shoppers don’t know it,
the store’s employees are plugged into mobile apps, which keep them
apprised of who’s in the store and what data is being input into that giant
video wall. Then, when customers enter the dressing rooms, things
get interesting.
     All the clothing and accessories in Minkoff’s new stores are out-
fitted with RFID tags—radio signal-emitting tags frequently used in
theme park access wristbands and in credit cards. The dressing rooms at
Rebecca Minkoff’s new stores in New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco,
and Tokyo are equipped with RFID shields that allow them to identify
which clothing customers bring in to that specific dressing room.
     The dressing rooms themselves have mirrors that double as large
touch screens. A computer automatically builds an inventory, based
on the RFID tags, of the clothing a customer brought in with them.

                                                                              221
222                 How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja

      The touch screen lets the customer switch to a series of mood-lighting
      setups and, crucially, integrates Minkoff’s e-commerce operation into
      the dressing room.
           Different sizes and colors of the items a customer brings in are auto-
      matically showcased up on the screen. If something does not fit, they
      can order a different-size version to be added to their online cart for
      future checkout. Each piece of clothing they brought in and didn’t try
      on is converted into a lead. The innovation lets retailers like Minkoff see
      which items individual customers are not buying. This lets retailers then
      send emails to customers urging them to return and take another look
      at the clothes they didn’t end up purchasing.
           In this book, we have only scratched the surface of what predic-
      tive analytics can do for marketers. We predict that there will be more
      and more use cases of predictive analytics in marketing. Predictive mod-
      els will become more easily accessible and available to all marketers, at
      companies large and small, as time goes on. Also, predictive models will
      increasingly power real-time, personalized communications with cus-
      tomers both in the digital and physical world. The store of the future
      will be very different than the store we know today, as we saw in the
      story about Rebecca Minkoff. Lastly, we believe the widespread accessi-
      bility of big data and machine learning will spurn a true culture shift of
      rebuilding marketing practices around the customer, rather than around
      products or selling channels.


      Advanced Predictive Analytics Models
      In this book, we choose to focus on the predictive models that can have
      the biggest impact on customer value in the shortest period of time and
      are most widely used by early adopters in predictive marketing. However,
      there are many other predictive models which advanced marketers could
      use. Following are just a couple of examples so you get an idea of how
      widely these techniques can apply.
          An engagement propensity model predicts the likelihood of a customer
      to engage with a brand. Engagement can be defined in various ways,
      but most of the time it describes events such as opening an email,
      clicking on an email, or visiting a brand’s website. Using an engagement
      propensity model, marketers can determine the right frequency of
      emails by throttling the number of emails a person receives based on this
                       The Future of Predictive Marketing                      223

engagement propensity. You could also include a directional indicator to
the engagement model to show whether a customer is becoming more
or less engaged with the brand. Marketers can use this model to target
down-trending customers with special messages and offers to prevent
them from leaving the brand.
     A total size of wallet model can predict the maximum possible spend
for each customer. This is often called size of wallet or total addressable
market (we will use the acronym TAM for Total Addressable Market)
and is defined as the total yearly spend by a single customer on the prod-
ucts/services sold by a company. A TAM prediction can also be made for
a specific product category. Marketers can use these models to identify
customers who are likely to spend more with the brand. As with engage-
ment, you can complement a TAM model with a Direction of TAM
model. A Direction of TAM model predicts whether the total address-
able market for a given customer is growing or shrinking. For example, a
hot start-up company may have a low TAM on servers today but its direc-
tion of TAM may be very high, indicating it is growing fast and could
become an important prospect soon. Marketers can use this model to
identify hot prospects.
     A pricing optimization model predicts the price that best drives sales,
volume, or profitability. The model should be customized based on
what you are optimizing for—sales, profits, volume, or any other factor.
A marketer can use a pricing optimization model to decide the best
price for a given product or service for each customer. A different
model can be developed for each product you want to do this for,
or a more generic model can be used that predicts price sensitivity
of a customer in general. Similarly, an offer optimization model can
determine which offer will have the most impact on which customer.
This kind of model can be configured to maximize conversion, revenue,
or margin. This model helps marketers to send the right offers to the
right people.
     A keyword-to-contact recommendation model can predict the affinity of
a customer to certain content, such as a newsletter or email, based on
things like web behavior or past purchases. Similarly, a hot topics detec-
tion model would predict what are the hot topics or hot products that
customers are interested in based on analysis of a customer’s social activ-
ity, website logs, sales, and other sources. Marketers could use these
predictions to decide on content marketing topics for specific customers.
224                  How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja

           A predictive clustering model predicts which cluster a customer will fall
      into in the future. Marketers can use these predictions to start differ-
      entiating treatment of customers right after they have been acquired.
      There is no longer a need to wait for them to express their behavior to
      understand who they are. Instead, marketers can react before it is too
      late when customers are moving to lower value customer clusters.


      Think Like a Predictive Marketer
      Something struck us in our work with successful early adopters of predic-
      tive marketing. These people took a different approach. There is a strong
      win-win here for consumers, companies, and individual marketers alike.
      Customer satisfaction is up, companies have been transformed around
      the customer, and individual marketers have gained a higher profile in
      their companies. One company we worked with was able to double
      overall revenue by growing its online revenue around a brand that was
      rooted in stores. Online purchases rose from 20 percent to 80 percent of
      revenues in the process.
           So we finish with some advice, not on what to do, but on how to be.
      Here are some lessons learned from predictive marketers that will help
      you make this amazing transition.
           First, if there is only one lesson you take away from reading this
      book it is to focus on the customer and organize your thinking around
      the customer. Customer-centricity is not a new concept. In fact, mar-
      keters have strived to focus on the customer since the dawn of market-
      ing. Just because the concept has been around for a long time doesn’t
      mean it has been implemented successfully. And just because your com-
      pany might have failed to build a true customer-centric culture so far
      doesn’t mean you shouldn’t try again. Big data and predictive analyt-
      ics truly enable a customer-centric organization in a way that wasn’t
      previously possible.
           Second, focus on actions, not analysis. Too many analytics projects
      fall flat because companies get stuck in the proverbial analysis paralysis
      phase. Once you get used to numbers, you can get hooked on them.
      Every revelation about your customers will prompt another question.
      We only have a low percentage of repeat buyers. Why is that? Are the
                       The Future of Predictive Marketing                       225

defectors young or old? Do we have more defections in the store than
online? Are there certain products that bring in more repeat customers?
Are the defectors returning more products than others? There is no
end to the questions you could ask, and answer, using customer data.
However, there is a real risk in asking too many questions all at once.
The risk is that you do nothing with the data. Just having data alone will
not change anything. Only ask questions that will lead to an action, oth-
erwise, it’s all nice to know. This is what a lot of consultants do, pages of
analysis without any action, all interesting facts. You will only improve
customer experiences, lifetime revenue, and your company’s financial
performance if you act on customer data. This means using even just
one customer insight to change something, to launch one campaign
that might improve things. In this example, perhaps it is to launch or
improve a customer welcome campaign with post-purchase recommen-
dations and see if it makes a difference. The sooner you start acting on
customer data, the sooner data-driven marketing becomes a way of life.
Also, it helps to have some early wins, in the form of improved customer
satisfaction and revenues, to give you the mandate inside your company
to continue your data explorations.
     Third, get started today, keep it simple and iterate. It is true that
the technology landscape of vendors supporting predictive marketing is
changing rapidly. Newer and better technologies will become available
every year. However, that is not a good reason to sit and wait. There is
a huge benefit in being an early mover. The companies featured in this
book know that. A major challenge we had in writing this book was
to get marketers to agree to share the results they have achieved with
predictive marketing. Often we heard: “We don’t want our competi-
tors to know just yet how big the rewards are from deploying predictive
marketing” or: “We view our predictive marketing initiatives as a major
competitive advantage and we do not want others to know about it.”
This tells you something. Take a risk and get started with predictive
marketing—even if it is at a small scale. It will take your company a while
to get used to the new way to thinking required for predictive market-
ing, so the sooner you can start this transformation and learning process,
the better off you are. Eventually, your customers will demand that you
serve them more relevant content, and as your competitors are rolling out
226                 How to Become a True Predictive Marketing Ninja

      predictive marketing, you may start to lose customers to them. If you
      know you will have to adopt predictive marketing eventually anyway,
      why not start today and gain a competitive advantage?
           Fourth, frequently try new things and measure everything. Don’t
      expect that you will crack the nut on predictive marketing on the first
      attempt. It will require some trial and error to find the data and the
      campaigns that work for your company, but the only way to learn this
      is to get started. However, make sure you formulate a clear hypothe-
      sis for every experiment and test your hypothesis by A/B testing or by
      always including a holdout group that doesn’t receive the new treatment.
      Improve gradually by testing new things. Be patient. It may take a while
      for your company to catch on. Don’t stop after the first failed experi-
      ment. Some of our most successful clients run hundreds of campaigns,
      each contributing a small percentage to the overall experience and life-
      time value of their customers. Like football, predictive marketing is a
      game of inches. Every marketing play helps to move the ball forward
      down the field, toward the goal of loyal and profitable customers.
           Fifth, communicate successes inside and outside your company.
      As you start to see results with predictive marketing, share these with
      the world. There is a real advantage in finding a group of like-minded
      marketers—inside your industry—and comparing notes. Perhaps you
      can find marketers at companies or brands that you have a lot in
      common with but don’t directly compete. Your learning will accelerate
      if you don’t have to invent the wheel by yourself. Predictive marketing
      is turning into a powerful movement, and finding like-minded prac-
      titioners can be both profitable and fun. We recommend you also tell
      customers about your experiments, perhaps using your blog or by doing
      a press release. We would be happy to put you in touch with reporters
      keen to write about this movement. Customers will like reading about
      the fact that you are investing in better understanding and serving
      them, as well as efforts to eliminate irrelevant mass marketing practices.
      Lastly, blog or tweet about your successes so you can get the credit you
      deserve as a forward thinking, modern marketer. Why not build your
      own reputation in the process of adopting predictive marketing?
           These are the principles of predictive marketing. We are very lucky
      to get to witness one of history’s most profound technology and cul-
      tural revolutions. Aspire to these qualities and you can use the strategies
      we’ve laid out to your advantage—or invent your own. You’ll be able to
                       The Future of Predictive Marketing                     227

build on your successes, both with customers and within the company.
And then, as predictive marketing rises and becomes ubiquitous, you
will be ready.
    Marketing is on the forefront of a much larger revolution. Machine
learning will eventually permeate all walks of life and improve the quality
of education, philanthropy, and health care, among others. As marketers,
we are the pioneers who are exploring how to best use the intelligence of
machines to improve our lives—without invading privacy in undesirable
ways. What you do truly matters. We wish you the best of luck in your
predictive marketing endeavors and encourage you to tell us about your
experiences:

Website: www.predictivemarketingbook.com
Predictive Marketing Book LinkedIn group: www.linkedin.com/groups?
    gid=8292127
Twitter: twitter.com/agilone

    Please stay in touch and join the conversation!
APPENDIX



Overview of Customer
Data Types

Purchases and Transactions
You can track online purchases by a tag you install on your website
or directly from your order management system, which could be your
e-commerce platform. You can track in-store purchases from your point
of sale (POS) application or an order management system. Often, store
purchases are collected by a different system than online or phone pur-
chases. It is extremely important to be able to tie all purchases back to the
same person. For example, if you send abandoned cart reminders with-
out reconciling online and phone purchases, people who abandoned a
cart online, but completed the purchase over the phone, may receive
a discount coupon for checking out their abandoned cart. These cus-
tomers are going to be upset and complain: “You mean that if I had
waited, I could have received a discount for my item?”


Web and Online Behavior
If you are a business marketer, web browsing behavior and email interac-
tion may be even more important than purchases. These two behavioral
data points give you a good idea of the future intent of a prospect or
customer. Purchases alone would not give you enough information in
business, given that there are typically much fewer purchases than in

                                                                                229
230                         Overview of Customer Data Types

      consumer marketing. On the flipside, the decision cycle in business mar-
      keting is much longer so there are more of these prepurchase data points.
      In fact, predicting who will purchase in business marketing is so lucrative,
      that a cottage industry of specialized “predictive lead scoring” vendors
      has sprung up to help marketers know which prospects are getting ready
      to make a purchase. With this information in hand, companies can focus
      their limited sales resources on the customers that matter most.
           You may not be able to recognize all visitors during their first visit;
      however, using cookies—tags placed on a customers browsing activity—
      you can start tracking the behavior even for anonymous visitors and tie
      this back to real people later. You will know who people are when they
      identify themselves, for example, by making a purchase or by signing
      up for your newsletter, or by filling in a form before downloading an
      electronic book or watching a video from your website. You can use
      progressive profiling to collect customer information without hurting
      conversion rates. Instead of having to fill out 15 form fields in order to
      register, a site visitor only visits a couple of fields at a time. For example
      the first time customers come to the site, they fill just first name, last
      name, and email and on the second visit are asked for phone number
      and zip code, and so forth.


      Email Behavior
      Email opens and clicks can be an important signal of user engagement
      and likelihood to buy. You can learn much about customers by ana-
      lyzing which emails they read and how often they open your mail.
      This information can even be used to make predictions about the likeli-
      hood of an individual to unsubscribe from your email list. Unsubscribes
      are seemingly innocuous, but are actually very expensive. We come back
      to optimizing email frequency in Chapter 9 of the book.


      Household and Account Grouping
      Householding was an important data processing step in catalog market-
      ing, where marketers didn’t want to send the same catalog twice for two
      buyers from the same household. Not only does householding help to
      reduce direct mail costs, it helps you better understand truly valuable
      customers. By myself, I may not look like a very valuable customer, but
                       Overview of Customer Data Types                       231

if I directly influence the purchases of a number of household members
I may very well be a VIP.
     The relationship between individuals and the households they
belong to is not always easy to see. Using the person’s name and
address, likely relationships between family members can be established.
Software can even be used to automatically assign a head of household,
which is the person deemed most influential in that household when it
comes to buying from your brand.
     In business marketing, the relationship between a contact (a prospect
or a customer) and the company he or she works for is often recorded in
the company’s customer relationship management system. For new leads
coming in, you may need to invest in custom code or third-party tools
to automatically link contacts to the account they belong to.


Location
After customers make their first purchase, their home address can be
derived from the billing or shipping address. It is useful to have soft-
ware automatically calculate and append the longitude and latitude of
the location of a customer’s home address. This will allow you to make
other calculations later on and to target customers based on attributes
like their proximity to a certain store. For example, when you have a
new store opening you could send all customers within a 10-mile radius
a postcard invitation to come by and check out your new location.
     When 100% Pure, a cosmetics retailer that started as an online-only
brand, decided it wanted to open up physical stores it turned to the
data it collected on existing customers. Based on their shipping and
billing addresses collected when they bought products online, the com-
pany chose its new physical store locations. You can read more about the
100% Pure experiences with predictive marketing in Chapter 12.
     For business marketing, company address is also very important, as
salespeople often get assigned based on the location of a customer.
     Beyond a customer’s home address, it is also useful to collect more
temporal location information. In other words, it is useful to know
where the customer is right now. Web logs can be used to look up a
customer’s IP number and marketers can determine a customer location
based on this. You might have experienced this technology most vividly
232                         Overview of Customer Data Types

      when you travel overseas and Google is asking you if you want to switch
      the default language of your search engine.
           Mobile technologies such as iBeacon determine a smartphone
      location with high accuracy. Supermarkets such as Marsh and Safeway
      have been early adopters of iBeacon technology. Studies conducted by
      Coca-Cola and Procter & Gamble among others show an immense
      difference in effectiveness between offers that are made to consumers
      right in the store versus at home or elsewhere. The time-of-purchase
      power is very important. For example, beacons in Marsh stores will be
      able to trigger alerts such as shopping lists, ads, and other content for
      customers who use Marsh’s mobile app. And because beacons are more
      accurate than GPS, it can send the alerts when you are in the right aisle.


      Call Center Interactions, Meetings, and Social
      Interactions
      Customers may be making phone calls to your company, providing even
      more important data points. New text analysis software can help you
      record and analyze the length and frequency of calls, as well as the topics
      of conversation and customer sentiment. The easiest way to incorpo-
      rate call center interactions is to classify each call into a category and to
      append this category to each customer data profile.
          Especially for business marketing, the fact that a prospect or a cus-
      tomer agrees to meet with you over the phone or in person is a strong
      buying signal and you want to record this in your database. As with
      purchases and call center interactions, there are a large number of data
      points—direct and derived—that can be recorded about each meeting.
      Think about the time, location, and length of the meeting as well as the
      customer sentiment during the meeting.
          Social interaction poses the same problems as call center data.
      These are typically natural text conversations, and in order to append
      actionable information to a customer profile, you will need to classify or
      tag the social interaction. Vendors are trying to mine sentiments from
      social comments, such as whether a customer is making a positive or a
      negative comment. The problem so far has been that most of these senti-
      ment analysis packages are highly inaccurate and can give marketers more
      misinformation than helpful data points. Large consumer brands often
                        Overview of Customer Data Types                          233

resort to assigning customer service personnel to monitor social feeds and
to manually classify and assign conversations.

Returns, Complaints, and Reviews
Returns and complaints hold very rich information about customers’
likely retention and advocacy. Not many customers return or complain
and therefore it is sparse data, but it should be highly paid attention to.
For example, it turns out that in order to predict customer lifetime value
or customer retention, returns or complaints are among the top five most
important variables.
     Reviews and surveys can provide information that is equally valuable
to complaints and returns. The reason we recommend you don’t start
with analyzing reviews when considering predictive marketing is that
often reviews and surveys are left at third-party sites. It is trickier to
integrate with these sites and tie back the reviews to a specific customer.
Some of this might violate customer privacy, and not all customers are
comfortable with it.

Gender
Segmenting your customers by gender is one of the most basic segmen-
tations you can do. It is easy to create a newsletter with a dynamic header
that will change based on the gender of the recipient. This has proven
to significantly increase click and conversion rates. Also, there really isn’t
a point to send feminine products promotions to men and shaving pro-
motions to women. Typically the gender of customers isn’t collected
specifically as part of a purchase but software algorithms can automat-
ically recognize most names and tag many of your customers as men
or women.
     Beyond targeting men and women with different marketing
and offers, men and women also have different shopping behaviors.
We recently analyzed 1 million consumers visiting gift and variety sites
and found the following differences:

• Men have a 24 percent higher lifetime value than women because
  they shop more often and have larger transactions.
• Men are twice as likely to buy using rewards points than women.
234                        Overview of Customer Data Types

      • Men are slightly more expensive to service, with margins for men
        being 4 percent lower than women, because they use more rewards
        and more discounts.
      • Men are slightly more likely to buy across multiple product categories,
        such as socks, pants, and watches rather than buying only pants.
      • Men are slightly more likely to buy from Amazon rather than from a
        brand or specialized retailer’s site directly.

          If you are a marketer for one of these sites, you may want to offer
      rewards points to male customers, as they are very receptive to rewards
      programs. You may also want to focus your retention budget on female
      customers who are more apt to return and buy frequently.


      U.S. Census Data
      U.S. census information offers an important source of data enrichment
      that is often overlooked. U.S. census data is freely available to everybody
      and can be matched with your customer records based on zip code.
          If you know how many people live in a certain area you can com-
      pare that to the number of customers you have in that area. So now you
      can essentially calculate your market penetration for a specific region.
      Based on this information you may decide to increase your acquisi-
      tion budget for regions with low penetration. You can learn from U.S.
      census data what kind of housing is most popular in a specific neigh-
      borhood. Especially if you are marketing lawn mowers, it could be very
      important to know whether this is a neighborhood of apartments or
      single-family homes. You can approximate household income based on
      a customer’s zip code. Household income has always proven important
      for understanding customer behavior.


      Vertical and Size
      In business marketing, the size and industry of a company is probably the
      most frequently used demographic data for segmentation after location.
      Third-party databases can help to augment your data with the right com-
      pany size, vertical, and number of employees. Traditionally companies
                        Overview of Customer Data Types                           235

like Dunn and Bradstreet and Harte Hanks provided this data. Increas-
ingly, the most accurate and up-to-date view of company size, at least
the number of employees, is LinkedIn. LinkedIn will not have revenue
data, but probably has an up-to-date count of the number of employees.
Industry vertical and employee size in business marketing become very
important when calculating the total available market or the share of
wallet or market share. Business marketers typically don’t care about the
overall penetration of a market, but about the penetration of a specific
market segment—by vertical or company size.


Other Customer Data Points
The amount of data you can collect about customers really has no end.
For example, there are many third-party data sources that could be
tapped to enrich your customer data. One popular example is to mash
up a customer’s location with the weather that is predicted for that area.
If you could collect both in real time, you might surface umbrellas to
the front page of your website just like you would in a physical store
during rainy periods. One retailer we work with has experimented
with weather-based campaigns, but has not yet found a profitable way
to leverage it on its site. First of all, it is not trivial to create campaigns
on the fly in response to weather, and second, it has not yet been found
that this increases sales materially.
INDEX




NOTE: Page references in italics refer to figures.

Abandoned cart programs, 24,              Alain Afflelou, 139
       148–149                            Amatriain, Xavier, 4
Accenture, 54                             Amazon, 4, 33–34, 113
Account grouping, 47                      Anonymous website visitors,
Acquisition                                      recognizing, 147, 216
  managing customers, 70, 70–71           Apple, 111, 144
  marketing spending optimization         Application programming interface
       for, 78–86, 79, 80, 81, 82,               (API), 192
       83, 84, 85                         Appreciation campaigns, 161–163
  using clusters to improve, 99–100       Arcelik, 94, 125
  value-based marketing for,              Artun, Omer, 19
       115–116, 116                       Audience, understanding, 187
Active customers, strategies for,         Average Revenue Per User
       112–113                                   (ARPU), 72
Addresses
  collecting data, 231–232                Baymard Institute, 148
  validating data, 52–53                  Behavior of customers
Address type flag, 52                        behavior-based clusters, 94, 97–99,
Advanced analytics, 204                            98
Advertising spending, conversion rate        buying behavior and outlier
       and, 81, 81–83, 82, 83                      detection, 37
AgilOne                                      email behavior and data
  on abandoned cart/search                         collection a, 47
       campaigns, 148, 149                   likelihood to engage models
  on adoption of predictive                        and, 130–136, 132, 133, 134,
       marketing, 14, 16, 18                       136
  on growing customer value, 156          Benchmarking, for marketing
  inception of, 19                                 spending, 80, 81
  on marketing spending                   Best Buy, 19
       optimization, 74                   ‘‘Bias-variance dilemma”, 39

                                                                                   237
238                                      Index

      Big-big-but-do-not-return                 questions to ask of vendors,
             segment (high-value                      191–196
             customers), 162, 163               technical capabilities for predictive
      Big data, 3–21                                  marketing, 187–191
      Birge, Robert, 139                      Churn
      Birthdays, of customers, 38               churn management programs,
      Blattberg, Robert C., 120                       174–175, 175
      Bosch, 43–44                              differences in, 172, 172–174, 173
      Brand management                          negative churn concept, 170
        brand-based clusters, 94–97, 97         preventing, 74
        customer relationships and, 14–20       See also Retention
      Browsing, abandoned, 150–151            Classifier and system design, 39–40
      Burlington Coat Factory, 106            Clienteling, 49–53
      Business models, retention              Cloud options, 199–200
             and, 171, 171                    Clustering
      Business understanding, need for, 210     avoiding mistakes and, 100
                                                cluster DNA, 94
                                                defined, 23, 25
      Call centers, data collection             to improve customer acquisition,
             and, 47                                  99–100
      Campaign automation, 190–191,             insight from, 101
             199–200. See also Information      models, 25–28, 27
             technology (IT)                    overview, 93–94
      Carts, abandoned, 148–149                 predictive clustering model, 224
      CASS certification, 52                    segmentation compared
      Central Desktop, 175–176                        to, 26–28
      Cetiner, Bora, 94                         types of, 94–99, 96, 97, 98
      Channels                                CMO Club, 54
       finding channels that bring            Collaborative filtering
             high-value customers, 88–89      recommendations, overview, 33–34
       last-touch attribution, 89–92, 91      types of recommendation models,
       for making recommendations to                  34–36, 35
             customers, 144                   Complaints, data collection and, 47
       omni-channel marketing, 166–167        Conlumino, 146, 218
       questions for data collection,         Content
             60–61                              determining, 187
       vendor support for, 191                  making recommendations,
      Checklist of predictive marketing               143–144
             capabilities, 185–196            Context, customers and, 141–142
       organizational capabilities,           Conversion, 145–154
             185–187                            abandoned browse campaigns,
       overview, 188                                  150–151
                                     Index                                   239

  abandoned cart campaigns,               working with IT on data
        148–149                                integration, 43, 54–57, 55
  abandoned search campaigns,            Customer relationship management
        149–150                                (CRM) systems, 203–204
  conversion rate and marketing          Customers
        spending, 81, 81–83, 82, 83       customer-centricity, 224
  look-alike targeting and, 151–154,      customer value path, 83–84, 84
        152                               power of customer equity,
  retargeting (remarketing)                    8–10, 11
        campaigns, 145–147                predictive marketing popularity
Costco, 106                                    and, 3
Costs, of marketing. See Marketing        predictive marketing use cases,
        spending                               11–12, 13
Cross-selling, 138–139                    privacy of, 215–220
Customer journey, 103–114                 questions for data collection,
  first value, 105–107                         58–60
  “give to get”, 103, 155                 See also Behavior of customers;
  life-cycle marketing strategies,             Conversion; Customer
        109–114, 110                           journey; Customer personas;
  new value, 108–109                           Customer profiles; Growth;
                                               Lifetime value; Predictive
  overview, 103–105, 104
                                               analytics; Reactivation;
  recommendations made during
                                               Retention; Value-based
        customer life cycle, 140–141
                                               marketing
  recurring value, 107–108
Customer personas, 93–101
  avoiding mistakes when using           Data analysis
        clusters, 100                     customer control and, 218
  insights, 101                           need for, 20, 20–21
  overview, 93–94                         preparing data for, 50–54, 51
  types of clusters, 94–99, 96, 97, 98    vendor support for, 193–194
  using clusters to improve              Data collection
        acquisition, 99–100               cleansing and preparation, 37
Customer profiles, 43–61                  need for, 20, 20–21
  data analysis preparation,              vendor support for, 191–193
        50–54, 51                        Data Driven Marketing (Jeffrey),
  data collection design,                       16–17
        45–47, 46                        Data integration
  data collection types, 47, 47–57,       checkllist for, 189
        48                                need for, 18–21, 20
  overview, 43–45                        Data management platforms
  questions to use for data, 57–61              (DMPs), 202
240                                        Index

      Data Protection Directive (European       Entenmann’s, 121
             Union), 219                        Enthusiasts (email subscribers),
      Data Security Standard, Payment                 131–136, 132, 133, 134, 142
             Credit Card Industry
             (PCI DSS), 219                     Facebook, look-alike targeting
      Deduplication, 53–54                              example, 152, 158–153
      Deighton, John, 120                       Fallen from grace segment
      Delivery Point Validation (DPV), 52               (high-value customers), 163
      Design principles, for data collection,   Feature generation/extraction, 38–39
             45–47, 46                          First Chicago Corporation, 122
      Direct mail, for welcome                  First party data, 45
             campaigns, 158                     First-time buyers, likelihood to
      Discount “junkies”, 24                            buy, 124–125
      Discounts, likelihood to buy and,         First Union Bank, 122
             126–128, 127                       First value, 105–107
      Do-it-yourself predictive marketing,      Fordham, Mark, 175–176
             197–198                            Forrester, 142
      Dunn and Bradstreet, 234–235              Free membership offers, 23
      Dursun, Bulent, 6                         Freemium business model, 106, 142
                                                Frequency, of email, 133, 139–136,
      Early adopters                                    134, 136, 187
        predictive marketing popularity         Fuzzy matching, 53–54
              and, 3
        predictive marketing value and,         GameStop, 165–167
              16–17                             Gaming industry, 4–5
      Earthlink, 17                             Gaston, Katie, 175–176
      Einstein (First Union Bank), 122          Gates, Bill, 16
      Email marketing                           Gender, data collection about,
        for abandoned cart campaigns,                    233–234
              148–149                           Get Elastic, 217
        delivering, 194                         ‘‘Give to get”, 103, 155
        email service providers (ESPs),         Google Adwords, 47, 150
              202–203, 209                      Government legislation, privacy
        frequency of email, 133, 139–136,                issues and, 219–220
              134, 136, 187                     Growth, 155–167
        likelihood to engage models,               customer appreciation campaigns,
              130–136, 132, 133, 134, 136                161–163
        privacy issues and, 215–220                initial transaction and, 155–156,
        retargeting with, 145–147                        156
        validating addresses, 53                   loyalty programs, 163–166
      Engagement propensity model,                 managing customers and, 70, 71
              222–223                              negative churn concept and, 170
                                      Index                                       241

  new product introductions,              customer relationship management
       160–161                                   (CRM), 203–204
  omni-channel marketing, 166–167         data integration and, 43,
  post purchase programs, 157–159                54–57, 55
  replenishment campaigns and             data management platforms
       repeat purchase programs,                 (DMPs), 202
       159–160                            do-it-yourself predictive
  value-based marketing for                      marketing, 197–198
       medium-value customers,            email service providers (ESPs),
       120–121                                   202–203, 209
  welcome programs, 157–158               getting started with predictive
                                                 marketing, 205–207
Harrah’s Entertainment, 5                 goals for, 204–205
Harte Hanks, 234–235                      machine learning, 7–8, 16, 27–28
Harvard Business Review, 120, 121         outsourcing to marketing service
High-value customers                             providers (MSPs), 198–199
 customer appreciation campaigns          overview, 201
       for, 161–163                       predictive marketing popularity
 marketing spending on, 86, 92–93,               and, 3, 17–20
       91                                 technical capabilities for predictive
 value-based marketing for,                      marketing, 187–191
       115–120, 116, 117, 118, 119        vendor support and, 194–196
Historical lifetime value (LTV),          web analytics, 202
       64–65                            Initial transaction, importance of,
Home addresses, data collection                  155–156, 156
       about, 231–232                   IP numbers, data collection about,
Homejoy, 158                                     231–232
Honda, 121
Householding, 230–231                   Jeffrey, Mark, 16–18

iBeacon, 53                             Karabuk, Tulin, 94
Identifiable information, of            Kayak, 139
       customers, 216                   Keyword-to-contact
Imputation, 38                                 recommendation model, 223
Inactive customers, strategies for,     K.I.D.S./Fashion Delivers, 106
       113–114
Information technology (IT),            Lapsed customers
       197–207                             strategies for, 107
  advanced analytics, 204                  value-based marketing for,
  campaign management and                        118–119, 119
       marketing cloud options,          See also Reactivation
       199–200                          ‘‘Last mile problem”, 40–41
242                                      Index

      Last-touch attribution,                 Loyalty programs
              89–92, 91                         customer profile data collection, 49
      Lead scoring, predictive,                 growing customer value and,
              128–130, 129, 130                      163–166
      Legal issues, of privacy, 219–220         rise of predictive marketing and,
      Lifetime value, 63–74                          5–6
        defined, 64                           Lululemon, 106
        historical lifetime value
              (LTV), 64–65                    Machine learning, 7–8, 16, 27–28
        increasing, for all customers,        Mainstreet (email subscribers),
              73–74, 74                               131–136, 132, 133, 134, 142
        increasing, for one customer, 70,     ‘‘Manage Marketing by the
              70–73                                   Customer Equity Test”
        optimizing (See Marketing                     (Blattberg, Deighton), 120
              spending)                       Marketing, as art and science,
        overview, 63–64                               211–212
        predicted customer value, 66–68       Marketing funnel
        upside lifetime value, 68–70            engineering, 81, 81–82
        See also Customer journey;              growing customer value and,
              Growth; Retention                       155–156, 156
      Likelihood models                         by life cycle, 82, 82–83
        defined, 123–124                      Marketing service providers (MSPs),
        likelihood to engage models,                  outsourcing to, 198–199
                                              Marketing spending, 77–92
              130–136, 132, 133, 134, 136
                                                for acquisition, retention,
        predictions, 124–130, 127, 129,
                                                      reactivation, 78–86, 79, 80,
              130
                                                      81, 82, 83, 84, 85
        See also Propensity models
                                                channels for last touch attribution,
      LinkedIn, 113, 235
                                                      89–92, 91
      Linking, 53–54                            channels that bring high-value
      Location, data collection about,                customers, 88–89
              231–232                           conversion rate and, 81, 87–83,
      Long-term email revenue, 133,                   82, 83
              133–136, 134, 136                 for customer retention, 177–178
      Look-alike targeting                      differentiating, based on customer
        defined, 151–152                              value, 86, 86–87
        Facebook example, 152, 152–153          overview, 77–78
        optimizing for similarity or reach,     products that bring high-value
              153–154                                 customers, 87, 88
      Low-value customers, value-based          to service low-value
              marketing for, 115–119, 116,            customers, 122
              117, 118, 119, 122              Marshall School of Business, 215
                                     Index                                      243

Mavi, 5–6, 17, 49, 121, 164–165        Organizational capabilities, checklist
McDonald’s, 120                               for, 185–187
‘‘Mean Stinks” campaign (Procter &     Outlier detection, 37–38
      Gamble), 105                     Outsourcing
Medium-value customers,                 data science and, 206
      value-based marketing for,        to marketing service providers
      115–119, 116, 117, 118, 119,            (MSPs), 198–199
      120–121
Meetings, data collection and,         PCI DSS (Data Security Standard,
      232–233                                  Payment Credit Card
Metaphonic algorithms, 52                      Industry), 219
Micro Warehouse, 198                   ‘‘Personalization versus Privacy”
Mobile technology, customer
                                               (Marshall School of
      profiles and, 232
                                               Business), 215
Moosejaw, 111–112
                                       Personalized recommendations.
MSA/region append, 52
                                               See Recommendations
Multitouch attribution, 89–92, 91
                                       PetCareRx, 114, 123
                                       Phantoms (email subscribers),
National Change of Address                     131–136, 132, 133, 134, 142
       (NCOA), 52                      Phased data integration strategy, 47,
Negative churn concept, 170                    47–48
Netflix, 4                             Pingree, Dan, 112
Newbies (email subscribers),           Poolcycle management framework,
       131–136, 132, 133, 134, 136             73, 74
New customers, strategies for,         Post purchase programs, 157–159
       111–112                         PowerUp Rewards (GameStop),
New product introductions, 160–161             165–166
New value, 108–109                     Predicted customer value, 66–68
New York Times, 125                    Predictive analytics, 23–41
Next-sell recommendations, 140            checklist for, 190
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone            defined, 24–25
       (NTT), 211                         overview, 23–24
‘‘No free lunch” theorem, 39              process, 36, 36–41
                                          reinforcement learning and
Obama, Barack, 125                             collaborative filtering,
Old school segment (high-value                 33–36, 35
      customers), 163                     supervised learning, 28–32, 29, 30
Omni-channel marketing, 166–167           unsupervised learning, 25–28, 27
100% Pure, 167, 231                    Predictive clustering model. See
Oner, Elif, 6                                  Clustering
Orange, 71–73                          Predictive marketing, 3–21
Order of performance, 90                  building blocks for, 20, 20–21
244                                     Index

      Predictive marketing (continued)         likelihood to engage models,
        careers in, 209–213                          130–136, 132, 133,
        future of, 221–227                           134, 136
        power of customer equity,              propensity deciles, 29–31, 30
              8–10, 11                         RFM modeling compared
        privacy issues, 215–220                      to, 31–32
        relationship marketing with,           supervised learning, 28–32, 29, 30
              6–8, 8                           training and testing periods,
        rise of, 3–6, 14–20                          29, 29
        use cases, 11–12, 13                 Prospective customers
        See also Behavior of customers;        converting, 145–151
              Checklist of predictive          look-alike targeting, 151–154, 152
              marketing capabilities;          strategies for, 109–111
              Conversion; Customer           Purchases
              journey; Customer personas;      data on, 47–50, 48
              Customer profiles; Growth;       making recommendations at time
              Lifetime value; Predictive             of, 138–139
              analytics; Reactivation;
              Retention; Value-based         Reactivation
              marketing                       campaigns for, 180–182
      Pricing optimization model, 223         of inactive customers, 74
      Privacy, 215–220                        marketing spending optimization
      Proactive retention management,              for, 78–86, 79, 80, 81, 82,
              175–180                              83, 84, 85
      Procter & Gamble, 105                   value-based marketing for,
      Products                                     118–119, 119
        finding products that bring          Rebecca Minkoff (stores), 221
              high-value customers, 87, 88   Recommendations, 137–144
        new product introductions,            channels for, 144
              160–161                         choosing customers or segments,
        product-based clusters, 94,                138–141
              95, 96                          content and, 143–144
        product-to-product                    overview, 33–34, 137–138
              recommendations, 34–35, 35,     types of models, 34–36, 35
              141–142                         understanding customer
        product-to-user types                      context, 141–143
              recommendations, 35            Recurring value, 107–108
        questions for data collection, 61    Reichheld, Frederick F., 121
      Propensity models, 123–137             Reinforcement learning
        defined, 28–29, 123–124               collaborative filtering and,
        likelihood to buy predictions,             33–36, 35
              124–130, 127, 129, 136          defined, 25
                                      Index                                    245

Repeat customers                        Sales, questions for data
 likelihood to buy, 126                         collection, 57–58
 strategies for, 112–113                Savings Catcher (Walmart), 50
Repeat purchase programs, 159–160       Search, abandoned, 149–150
Replenishment programs, 24,             Secret (Procter & Gamble), 105
       159–160                          Segmentation
Response models. See Propensity            recommendations and
       models                                   choosing customers
Retargeting (remarketing) campaigns             or segments, 138–141
 overview, 145                             vendor support for, 193–194
 triggers for, 146–147                     See also Clustering; Customer
Retention, 169–182                              profiles
 business models and, 171, 171          Shaklee, 21
 churn differences, 172, 172–174,       Shazam, 113–114, 186
       173                              Shehata, George, 21
 churn management programs,             Short-term email revenue, 133,
       174–175, 175                             139–136, 134, 142
 customer management and, 70, 71        Size data, collection of, 234–235
 data collection and, 49                Size of wallet, 68–70,
 marketing spending optimization                178, 223
       for, 78–86, 79, 80, 81, 82,      Sleepies (email subscribers),
       83, 84, 85                               131–136, 132, 133,
 negative churn concept, 170                    134, 136
 proactive retention management,        SmileTrain, 111
       175–180                          Social interactions, data collection
 reactivation campaigns, 180–182                and, 232–233
 understanding retention rate, 169      Spotify, 142–143
 value-based marketing for              ‘‘Sunk costs”, 85
       high-value customers,            Supervised learning
       119–120                             defined, 25
Returns                                    propensity models, 28–32
 by customers, 25                       Surveys, data collection and, 233
 data collection and, 233
Reviews, data collection and, 233       Targeting
Reward addict segment (high-value         improving precision of, 11–12
       customers), 162–163                vendor support for, 193–194
RFID, 221–222                           Tchin Tchin campaign (Alain
Rosling, Hans, 26                              Afflelou), 139
                                        TechCrunch, 142
                                        Third party data, 43, 235
Safe Harbor Principles, 219             Total Addressable Market
Sainsbury Stores, 17                           (TAM), 223
246                                       Index

      Total Rewards (Harrah’s                   reducing costs to service low-value
             Entertainment), 5                       customers, 122
      Transition matrix, 117,                   retaining high-value customers,
             117–118, 118                            119–120
                                              Value migration, 64–65, 174
      Uncommon Goods, 131                     Variable contribution margin, 86
      Unidentifiable information, of          Vendors, questions to ask of,
             customers, 216                          191–196
      Unsupervised learning                   Vertical data, collection of,
        clustering models, 25–28, 27                 234–235
                                              VIP customers. See High-value
        defined, 25
                                                     customers
      Upselling, 138–139
      Upside lifetime value, 68–70
      U.S. census data, collection of, 234    Wallet analysis, 68–70, 178, 223
      User-to-product recommendations,        Walmart, 50
             142                              Warning signs, of customer
      US-EU Safe Harbor Privacy Principles,          unhappiness, 176–180
             219                              Web analytics, 202
      U.S. Postal Service, 52                 Web behavior, data collection about,
                                                     229–230
                                              Welcome programs, 157–158
      Validation, of customer data, 51–54
                                              ‘‘Whales”, 120
      Value-based marketing, 115–122
        defined, 115
        growing medium-value customers,       York, Jerry, 198
             120–121
        overview, 115–119, 116, 117,          Zappos, 7, 146, 164
             118, 125                         Zendesk, 110
           WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.
